                                                             HAER NO.   MD-82
STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE
(Bridge No. F26-06)
Stauffer Road, spanning Israel Creek
Walkersville Vicinity                                                   »*'.-"
Frederick County                                                             /«*   '■ IX
Maryland




                                PHOTOGRAPHS   :"'

                   WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                   HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                         National Park Service
                            Northeast Region
                           U.S. Custom House
                          200 Chestnut Street
                        Philadelphia, PA 19106
                           HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD

            STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)                  HAER NO. MD-82

    Location:                        Stauffer Road spanning Israel Creek
                                     Walkersville Vicinity
                                     Frederick County
                                     Maryland

                                     UTM: 18.298060.4371040
                                     Quad: Walkersville, MD., 1:24,000

    Date of Construction:            ca. 1930

    Architect/Engineer:              Unknown

    Present Owner:                   Frederick County Department of Public Works
                                     118 North Market Street
                                     Frederick. Maryland 21701

    Present Use:                     Vehicular bridge
                                     Proposed for removal in 1996/1997.

    Significance:                    This bridge is associated with the development of
                                     transportation in Frederick County. Metal truss bridges
                                     were the most popular bridge form in the county between
                                     the 1870s and 1930s, facilitating vehicular movement
                                     throughout the developing region. These bridges; once
                                     common throughout rural Maryland, now represent an
                                     increasingly rare example of a modest, yet vital
                                     engineering structure found throughout the rural areas of
                                     the state.

    Project Information:             The bridge is being removed to a new location, probably
                                     for use as a pedestrian bridge. It is currendy structurally
                                     insufficient for its vehicular load. To mitigate the
                                     adverse effect of removal of the bridge from its original
                                     location, the State Historic Preservation Office stipulated
                                     documentation of the bridge in a narrative format.

                                     Elizabeth Jo Lamp!
                                     Lamp! Associates
                                     5111 Allan Terrace
                                     Bethesda, MD 20816
m
                                                STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                                  HAER No. MD- 82 (Page 2)


BRIDGE DESCRIPTION

The Stauffer Road bridge is located on Stauffer Road, northeast of the intersection of State
Routes 26 and 194. The bridge spans Israel Creek in the vicinity of several historic
farmsteads and east of a late twentieth-century housing development on Stauffer Road known
as "Discovery." Beyond this development, the Stauffer Road area is rural.

The structure is a single-span, four-panel, steel, pony truss, Pratt, full slope bridge with
riveted connections. It does not feature a manufacturer's plaque, so the exact date of
construction is uncertain. Judging by the character of its members and its method of
construction, however, a date in the early 1930s seems likely. (See below.)

The bridge is 62'-10" long with a 13'-0" roadway and features concrete abutments and stone
wingwalls. It is constructed of steel, the manufacturer of which is also unknown as there are
no imprints on the steel members. The bridge is composed of two. 16-0" end panels and
two, 15'-1" interior panels, set in a Pratt, hipped configuration. All connections are riveted.
the chords and inclined end posts are solid, wide features, revealing the structure's twentieth-
century heritage. The main ties are latticed, while the counters are slim paired rods. The
stringers and transverse beams are steel, bottom laterals are thin steel rods, and the concrete
deck is reinforced with rebars. The handrails and intermediate posts are latticed. In May
1995. at the time of last inspection, the bridge was in fair to poor condition, with severely
spailed abutments and concrete deck, and badly deteriorated floor beams.

The bridge is similar in the thickness of its members and details of its deck construction to
two other bridges in the county, built in the 1930s.1 One, located nearby, is a state-owned
bridge crossing the Monocacy River at Route 26. This bridge, which retains its
manufacturer's plaque, was constructed in 1932 by a contractor. The second bridge,
constructed during the same time frame, is located on Route 17 across Catoctin Creek in the
vicinity of Middletown. The relative similarity of features between these three bridges
suggests that the Stauffer Road bridge may date to the same period.2 The 1930s represents
the end of the period of metal truss bridge construction in the County, with most bridges
constructed between the 1870s and 1930s. For its era, the bridge is typical in its use of steel
members, Pratt configuration, and riveted connections.




    ' This comparison was pointed out by Ken Harwood, transportation engineer and local
bridge historian with the Frederick County Department of Public Works.
    :
        Likewise, the fact that the bridge is riveted, as opposed to welded, suggests a ca. 1930
date.
                                               STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                                 HAER No. MD- 82 (Page 3)


MANUFACTURING INFORMATION

There is no indication of any design source for the bridge. In addition to the lack of a
manufacturer's plaque, there are no known drawings to indicate the original design source.
The most likely scenario for the construction of the Stauffer Road Bridge would have been
the assembly of the bridge from a bridge company kit, undertaken either by a bridge
company representative or by an independent contractor.3 Local county commissioners
would have specified a certain bridge from a bridge company, ordering - via the company's
form - a single-span, Pratt, pony truss, riveted bridge. The bridge's various components
would have been standardized parts manufactured at a steel plant (channels, plates, bars, etc.)
which the bridge company then would have fabricated into bridge parts (posts, struts, chords,
etc.). These bridge components would have been cut. machined, and assembled at the shop,
then disassembled, and shipped as a kit to the bridge site. The kit would have contained the
various bridge sections (with imprints or matchmarks on larger members) and detailed
instructions and plans.

SIGNIFICANCE

The Stauffer Road Bridge has local significance for its role in expanding the agricultural
economy of Frederick County by connecting remote farm roads with more well-traversed
thoroughfares. It is also significant structurally as a local example of a low highway, Pratt,
full-slope bridge of the second quarter of the twentieth century.

Historical

The Stauffer Road bridge facilitated the flow of traffic and goods between the Ceresville area
and the city of Frederick to the southwest as well as to other markets in a more easterly
direction (such as New Market and Baltimore). The bridge is located in the community of
Ceresville, a rich fanning area named after Ceres, the Greek Goddess of harvest. The major
landmark in the community is the early nineteenth-century Ceresville Mill, which stands on
the south side of the Libertytown Road at Israel Creek. The mill's builder and owner was
General Otho Holland Williams, who owned a 600-acre estate in the area featuring a ca.
1812-1816 house.

The Stauffers were early landowners in the area, along with the Nicodemuses. In addition to
the grain mill on the Libertytown Road, a steam distillery was in place in 1858 along the
Stauffer road at Israel Creek, just to the west of today's bridge site. The farm closest to the
Stauffer Road Bridge is a federal-era farmstead on the south side of Stauffer Road at Israel


    3
     Conversation with Robert Vogel. former Curator, Division of Mechanical and Civil
Engineering, the Smithsonian Institution.
                                               STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                                 HAER No. MD- 32 (Page 4)


Creek which belonged to H. Nicodemus in 1858. Farms to the east and west of the bridge
on Stauffer Road date from the Federal through the Victorian eras.

Structural

Constructed most likely ca. 1930 of steel, the Stauffer Road Bridge is a significant indicator
of the metal truss bridge tradition in Frederick County. A truss bridge is defined by Milo
Ketchum in his 1920 work, The Design of Highway Bridges of Steel, Timber, and Concrete
as follows:

       A truss is a framework composed of individual members so fastened together that
       loads applied at the joints produce only direct tension or compression. The triangle is
       the only geometrical figure in which the form is changed only by changing the lengths
       of the sides. In its simplest form every truss is a triangle or a combination of
       triangles. The members of the truss are either fastened together with pins, pin-
       connected, or with plates and rivets, riveted/

Metal truss bridges began replacing wooden truss bridges nationally, in the 1840s. and, in
Frederick County, in the 1870s. The real push for metal truss bridges resulted from the
popularization of the railroad, which demanded that heavier loads be carried over waterway
spans.

The first all-metal truss bridges were constructed of iron: a combination of cast and wrought
iron members being necessary for both compressive and tensile force. In the 1870s, the
brittleness of cast iron put an end to its use and bridges came to be built entirely of wrought
iron. Wrought iron had both tensile and compressive properties, and could be manufactured
more economically.

The Pratt truss, the type seen at Stauffer Road, was patented by Thomas and Caleb Pratt in
 1844. It is characterized by a design with vertical compression members and diagonal
tension members. It was a particularly popular solution tor highway bridges because of its
relative ease of construction and strength. For low truss highway bridges spanning from 30
to 80 feet, either the Pratt or Warren types were recommended.5




   * Milo Ketchum. The Design of Highway Bridges of Steel, Timber, and Concrete, New
York: McGraw-Hill, Co., Inc.. 1920 (2nd edition), p. 103.

    - Ketchum, Milo S.. C.E, The Design of Highway Bridges and the Calculation of Stresses
in Bridge Trusses, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1908, p. 199.
                                              STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                                 HAER No. MD-82 (Page 5)


nineteenth century specifically to manufacture iron truss bridges. Many had their origins as
foundries, forges, or as local builders with expertise in timber bridge construction, and the
majority of bridge companies were located in the northeast and midwest (although Baltimore
County had quite a few in the state of Maryland). The companies would manufacture bridge
components from individual steel members, assemble the structure to test its strength and
durability, then de-assemble and ship the product in a kit to small localities. There, the
bridges would either be assembled by company representatives or local contractors. Twenty
small bridge companies, mostly out of New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, are known to
have produced metal truss bridges for Frederick County.6

In 1875, the development of steel by the Bessemer process, followed by the advent of the
open hearth process, caused the demise of the iron truss bridge and its replacement with steel.
Steel was more durable and stronger than iron and as cheap to produce. The transition from
iron to steel truss bridges occurred nationally in the 1890s. While some truss bridges in
Frederick County are fabricated of steel from that decade, iron truss bridges continued to be
built there up until the 1910s. Small bridge companies exploded in growth in the 1880-1910
period to capitalize on the new steel market. The use of steel permitted easier fabrication of
truss bridges at the shop site.

Beginning in 1900, however, the small bridge companies felt the pressure of competition
from large steel manufacturers, who entered the bridge manufacturing market as a natural
outgrowth of their steel manufacturing role. Andrew Carnegie's American Bridge Company
was created as a subsidiary of the United States Steel Corporation that same year, and was
able to buy up many of the small bridge companies across the country. In later years, other
steel giants, such as Bethlehem Steel, entered the bridge design and erection field as well.
The participation of the big corporate giants, coupled with standards published by state
highway commissions, resulted in the increasing standardization of truss bridge types.

In the 1920s, state highway commissions also developed standards for reinforced concrete
bridges and these new spans began replacing the metal truss bridges. By the 1930s,
reinforced concrete bridges replaced metal truss bridges as the structure of choice for small,
local spans, although rural outposts continued to build the metal trusses through the decade.
In the 1940s, steel girder bridges were introduced, and the metal trass bridge for small spans
was virtually extinct. It remained popular, and was catapulted into a highly visible art form,
however, for monumental river spans in the 1930s and 1940s.




     Maryland Historical Trust Inventory Forms for metal truss bridges in Frederick County.
                                              STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                                HAER No. MD- 82 (Page 6)


CONCLUSION

A majority of the surviving metal truss bridges in Maryland are Pratt through and pony truss
bridges, of both pin and riveted connections. Nonetheless,* these structures are a dying breed.
At one time fairly common in Frederick County, there were forty metal truss bridges
standing in 1975. Approximately 24 stand today. Six of the County's iron truss bridges;
three wood-truss, covered bridges; and one stone arch bridge are listed on the National
Register of Historic Places.
                                           STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                              HAER No. MD- 82 (page 7)


BIBLIOGRAPHY

A.   Engineering drawings: None.

B.   Historic views: None.

C.   Interviews:

     1.     Ken Harwood. Engineer. Frederick County Department of Pubiic Works,
            Division of Transportation Engineering. Transportation engineer and local
            bridge historian. June 24, 1996 telephone interview.

     2.     Robert Vogel, Industrial historian and metal truss bridge scholar. June 28,
            1996, telephone Interview.

D.   Bibliography:

     Primary and Unpublished Sources:

     Deibler. Dan Grove. A Survey and Photographic Inventory of Metal Truss Bridges in
     Virginia, 1865-1932. Charlottesville, Vir.: Virginia Highway & Transportation
     Research Council. May 1975.

     Frederick County Department of Public Works, Division of Transportation
     Engineering. Stauffer Road Bridge Inspection and Technical Data Notebook.

     Frederick County Historical Society. Vertical Files: "CeresviUe" and "Bridges."

     Frederick County Public Libraries. Vertical File: "Bridges."

     Maryland Historical Trust, State Historic Sites Inventory Form: Stauffer Road Bridge
     (F-8-4).

     P.A.C. Spero & Company and Louis Berger & Associates, Inc. Historic Bridges in
     Maryland: Historic Context Report. Baltimore: Maryland State Highway
     Administration. September 1994.
                                          STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
                                                            HAER No. MD- 82 (Page 8)


     Published Sources:

     Comp, T. Allan and Donald Jackson. Bridge Truss Types: A Guide to Daring and
     Identifying. Historic American Engineering Record, National Park Service, Technical
     Leaflet 95, 1977.

     DeLony, Eric. Landmark American Bridges. Boston: Little, Brown and Company,
     1993.

     Jackson, Donald C. Great American Bridges and Dams. Washington, D.C.: The
     Preservation Press. 1988.

     Ketchum, Milo S., C.E. The Design of Highway Bridges and the Calculation of
     Stresses in Bridge Trusses. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1908.

                . The Design of Highway Bridges of Steel, Timber and Concrete. New
     York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1920.

     Plowden. David. Bridges: The Spans of North America. New York: Norton, 1984.

E.   Likely sources not yet investigated: None.

F.   Supplemental material: None.
STAUFFER ROAD BRIDGE (Bridge No. F26-06)
               HAERNo. M0-82 (Page9)
