KENTUCKY ROUTE 708 BRIDGE                                         HAER No. KY-15
Spanning Middle Fork of Kentucky River
Tallega vicinity
Lee County
Kentucky




                                         PHOTOGRAPHS

                        WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                         HISTOR!C AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                              SOUTHEAST REGIONAL OFFICE
                                    National Park Service
                                U.S. Department of the Interior
                                     100 Alabama St. NW
                                      Atlanta, GA 30303
                   HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                        KENTUCKY ROUTE 708 BRIDGE          HAER No. KY-15


Location:                     Spanning the Middle Fork of the
                              Kentucky River near Talleg~, Lee
                              County, Kentucky          o.

                              UTM: 17-269860-4159430
                              QUAD: Tallege

Date of Construction:         1917

Present Owner:                Kentucky Transportation Cabinet
                              State Office Building
                              Frankfort, Kentucky

Present Use:                  Vehicular Bridge on KY 708

Si gni fi cance:              Only mixed pony-through truss by
                              Oregonia Bridge Company in Kentucky

Historian:                    Gregory D. Rawlings
                                             KENTUCKY ROUTE 708 BRIDGE
                                               HAER No. KY-15 (Page 2)




                KY 708 Tallege Bridge, Lee County

     The KY 708 Tallege Bridge of the Middle Fork of the Kentucky
River is eligible for the National Register of Historic Places as a
structure of State and local importance.   It possesses integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship and embodies
the distinctive characteristics of a type, period and method of
construction.   The 1917 metal truss b dge, although in poor
structural condition, is a good example of the evolution of civil
engineering technology and bridge construction in Kentucky.     The
current Structural Inventory and Appraisal (SIA) rating on the
KY 296 Bridge is 16.6 out of a possible 100 points.
     The bridge is located approximately 2000 feet south of the
KY 52/KY 708 intersection and provides for traffic fro~ several
schools and single family residences along the valley floors.
A Kentucky Geological Survey benchmark is located on the bridge
indicating an elevation of 681 feet.   The bridge is oriented on
an east-west axis, with a perpendicular crossing of the river.
The original bridge consisted of the main span Pratt Through truss
flanked on each end by two Pratt Half-hip Pony trusses.   The western
end pony truss was replaced in 1983 by a bailey bridge after it
failed.
     The design of the main center span is that of a Pratt Through
truss, the most popular late 19th and early 20th century bridge type.
This type was used when the requirements for heavy loads and long
                                              KENTUCKY ROUTE 708 BRIDGE
                                                HAER No. KY-15 (Page 3)




spans dictated the need for top lateral bracing with upper lateral
struts and sway bracing for increased rigidity.    The Pratt Through
truss exhibits the greatest variation in refinements and embellishments.
The remaining Pratt Half-hip Pony truss, the eastern span of the bridge,
is without top lateral bracing.    Pratt pony trusses were used for
economical reasons when the weight and length requirements of
particular crossing could be met by short spans of limited weight
capacity.   The combination of the bridge types makes this structure
and interesting pin-connected bridge.    This elegant truss rests
high above the river on unique metal piers constructed of angles
and lacing bars.   This is the only mixed pony-through truss constructed
in Kentucky by the Oregonia BridQe Company of Lebanon, Ohio.
     The three spans of the bridge have an overall length of
255 feet and a deck width of 12 feet.    The Pratt Through
truss is 127 feet long, with a substructure composed of concrete
abutments and metal frame truss piers.     ~s with all bridges of
this type, the top and bottom chords are parallel and the end post
inclined.   The end posts and top chords are built-up from 2 channels,
cover plate and stay bars.     The bottom chords are 2 rectilinear
loop welded eyebars.     The intermediate posts are two channels with
2 sets of lacing bars.     The diagonals are 2 round eyebars and 2 round
stirrup rods in the center panel and 2 rectilinear eyebars that are
loop welded in the remaining panels.     The hip verticals are built-up
                                         KENTUCKY ROUTE 708 BRIDGE
                                           HAER No. KY-15 (Page 4)




from 2 angles and stay bars.   One round eyebar that is loop-welded
with a turnbuckle for field adjustments make up the counters.      The
top lateral bracing is a singular round rod and the top lateral
struts are paired angles.   The floor beams and stringers are rolled
I-beams and the bottom lateral bracing consists of one round rod.
Other details entail the use of curved portal bracing and original
guardrail ing.
     The remaining Pratt Half-hip Pony truss is 66 feet long and
also pin-connected.   The end posts and top chords are 2 channels
with a cover plate and stay bars underneath.   The bottom chords
are 2 rectilinear eyebars that are loop-welded.   The intermediate
posts are paired angles with lacing bars.   The diagonals are 2 recti-
linear eyebars that are loop-welded and the counters consist of
one round eyebar that is loop-welded and filled with a turnbuckle.
The floor beams and stringers are rolled I-beams and the bottom lateral
bracings are singular round rods.   Other details include a wood deck
and original guardrail.
