CHICAGO AND NORTH WESTERN                            HAER No. WY-53
 RAILROAD STONE CULVERT
Railroad Milepost 514.23
Keeline Vicinity
Niobrara County
Wyoming;


                                                                 1-




             WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




              Historic American Engineering Record
                 Ftoc3iy Mountain Regional Office
                       National Park Service
                    Department of the Interior
                           P.O. Box 25287
                  Denver, Colorado 80225-0287
                                                             WY<5
                                                             I-        '
                HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
          CHICAGO AND NORTH WESTERN RAILROAD STONE CULVERT
                           HAER No. WY-53

I.    INTRODUCTION
      Location:           SE/SE/NE/NW/SW Section 10, T32N-R67W
                          Milepost 514.23 on Chicago and North
                          Western Railroad Right-of-way
                          Niobrara County, Wyoming
      USGS Quad:          Lost Springs, Wyoming 7.5' (1970)
      UTMS:               Zone 13/509170 mE   4733980 mN
      Date of
      Construction:       1901
      Present Owner       Chicago and North Western Transportation
                          Company
      Present Use:        Still in use as culvert
      Significance:       The stone culvert was constructed by the
                          Chicago and North Western Railroad in
                          1901 and is a distinctive example of
                          short-span stone construction using local
                          materials.    Although alterations have
                          been made to the north end of the
                          culvert, the south end remains intact and
                          is the facade that is visible to the
                          general public from U.S. Route 18-20.
     Project Statement:   The stone culvert represents a safety
                           ha2ard due to structural deficiencies and
                           increased rail traffic.        The stone
                           culvert will be replaced by inserting a
                           steel culvert and covering the old
                           structure with fill.        The approved
                           mitigation plan for this structure
                           consists of Historic American Engineering
                           Record (HAER) documentation.
                        Chicago and Northwestern
                        Railroad Stone Culvert
                        HABS No. WY-53
                        (Page 2)

Historian:   Robert Rosenberg
             Rosenberg Historical Consultants
             739 Crow Creek Road
             Cheyenne, Wyoming 82009
             November 1992
                                     Chicago and North Western
                                     Railroad Stone Culvert
                                     HAER No. WY-53
                                     (Page 3)
II.   HISTORY

           The Study Area is located in the southern portion of the
      Powder River Basin of southcentral Wyoming in what now
      comprises Niobrara and Converse counties. The Powder River
      Basin is located north of the North Platte River and did not
      initially lure Euro-Americans for development or settlement.
      Its resources and attributes were subtle and were recognized
      and utilized first by the American Indian. In fact, the area
      became a part of the last real stronghold of the Sioux,
      Cheyenne, and Arapahoe and was the scene of pitched battles
      between the U.S. Army and the indigenous Native Americans for
      control of the region for the last decades of the nineteenth
      century.
           Following a series of large scale military expeditions
      into the region in 1876, a treaty was drafted in which the
      Indians ceded the Black Hills and all lands west. Thus, by
      the spring of 1877, northeastern Wyoming Territory had been
      "cleared" for white settlement, and most of the indigenous
      tribes were confined to formal reservations outside of
      Wyoming.
           The Powder River Basin was bordered on the south by the
      North Platte River, the waterway paralleled by the Oregon
      Trail. Despite the fact that thousands of emigrants passed
      along the North Platte River corridor in the 1840s and 1850s,
      their destinations continued to be the more attractive lands
      in California, Oregon, and the Salt Lake Valley. [1]
           During the mid-1850s, the strains on the existing
      overland route became an important factor in stimulating the
      building of a transcontinental railroad. All transportation
      west of the Missouri River was by wagon, and both stagecoach
      and covered wagon travel were subject to the constant danger
      of Indian raids. Furthermore, the length of time involved in
      western emigration and freight deliveries via wagon trains was
      a deterrent to western development.
           In 1853 a bill was passed to appropriate funds for
      exploring different routes for a railway to the Pacific.
      Surveys of five main routes and various alternatives were
      conducted by the Corps of Engineers between 1853 and 1856.
      The outbreak of the Civil War emphasized the need to link the
      Trans-Mississippi West with the rest of the Union and aid
      military mobility. The possibility of a southern alignment,
      which may have been the shortest and least expensive, was
      precluded by the secession of the southern states. [2] During
                               Chicago and North Western
                               Railroad and Stone Culvert
                               HAER No. WY-53
                               (Page 4)
this era, the federal government had already financed a large
number of railroad projects east of the Mississippi due to the
dominant theme of "Manifest Destiny" that influenced
governmental decisions.    Therefore, as soon as the South
seceded from the Union, it became possible to secure passage
of the Pacific Railway Act of 1862. The railroad would link
the Union to the Pacific (hence the name Union Pacific), and
without the representation from the southern interests a more
northerly route was assured. [3]
     The Act authorized the construction of the railroad and
appropriated funds for its financing. The construction was
carried out by two subsidized corporations, the Union Pacific
to build west from Council Bluffs, Iowa, and the Central
Pacific to build east from Sacramento, California.     Actual
railroad construction began in earnest after the close of the
Civil War. [4]
    It originally seemed likely that the existing Oregon Trail
route with its gentle grades would be used by the first
transcontinental railroad.     However, for the segment in
Wyoming Territory, Chief Engineer Grenville Dodge chose a more
southerly route that closely paralleled the Overland Trail,
and the major towns of Cheyenne, Laramie, Rawlins, and Rock
Springs were created along the mainline as the Union Pacific
built through the region in 1867 and 1868. The two railroads
joined at the appointed location at Promontory Point, Utah,
and the famous golden spike was driven on May 10, 1869.
     Ironically, Wyoming Territory's first railroad was
conceived to link the continent, much like the Oregon Trail,
and settlement of the intervening territory was only a
secondary consideration. Thus, northeastern Wyoming Territory
and the North Platte River Valley remained far from rai1
service and were linked only via a system of rough, time
consuming north-south wagon roads. As a result, economic and
political development of the region was retarded, and the
population of the Wyoming Territory was concentrated in the
towns along the Union Pacific Railroad.
     The completion of the railroad spurred the establishment
of the cattle industry south of the North Platte in the late
1860s and early 1870s. After the Treaty of 1876 removed the
Native Americans from northeastern Wyoming Territory, these
cattlemen expanded their operations north of the North Platte
River to occupy the vast grasslands of the Powder River Basin.
     Fort Fetterman, a military post created near the junction
of the Bozeman Trail and the Oregon Trail in 1867, became the
                               Chicago and North Western
                               Railroad Stone Culvert
                               HAER No. WY-53
                               (Page 5)
center of a flurry of settlement, with numerous cattle ranches
locating along the principal drainages in the area between
1877 and 1882. [5]    After its abandonment by the military in
1882, Fort Fetterman became the site of Fetterman City, which
was established by the local residents.     When the railroad
began to expand into the region, this raw frontier settlement
hoped that it would build through the community; however, this
did not occur, because the railroad could not guarantee clear
title to land it sold on a military reservation. Instead, the
railroad    selected a new site several miles southeast of
Fetterman City and named it Douglas.
     The Fremont, Elkhorn, and Missouri Valley Railway (FE&MV)
had been gradually expanding its lines across central Nebraska
in the 1870s. After gold was discovered in the Black Hills
and the strikes proved of lasting significance, the FE&MV
built into the region by 1886. That same year, the Wyoming
Central Railway, a subsidiary of the Fremont, Elkhorn, and
Missouri Valley Railway, was organized in Wyoming Territory in
order to "extend its railroad westward along the valley of the
North Platte and Sweetwater through the counties of Albany,
Carbon, Sweetwater, and Uinta, and thence to the eastern
boundary of Utah Territory..." [6] The railway also stated
that it would build a branch line north to Montana Territory.
Railroad officials stated that the new line would be built
west to connect with the Central Pacific Railroad at Corinne,
Utah, to create a transcontinental route to the Pacific. [7]
     The new line branched off from the existing line at
Chadron, Nebraska, and ran seventy-seven miles west to the
site of Douglas, Wyoming. Douglas was laid out by railroad
officials in June ahead of the arrival of tracks. However,
town lots were not sold until the tracks arrived at the site.
Meanwhile, a temporary tent town grew up at the mouth of
Antelope Creek in anticipation of the railroad's arrival.
Residents of the tent town and at the site of old Fort
Fetterman moved to the new site when Douglas officially
opened. [8]
     Although survey and grading crews had been in the field
between Chadron and Douglas, the tracks did not reach Wyoming
Territory until late June 1886. Other new towns were created
along the line as grading and track laying continued. Over-
anxious speculators started building the town of Lusk, but
miscalculated the exact location of the final right-of-way,
and were forced to move about three miles. Lusk and Crawford,
Nebraska, thirty-five miles to the east, were officially laid
out by the railroad in July. Tracks were laid by the crews at
a rate of about two miles a day, with the grading crews well
                               Chicago and North Western
                               Railroad Stone Culvert
                               HAER No. WY-53
                               (Page 6)
ahead of the track-laying crews. The tracks reached the new
Lusk townsite on July 17, 1886, and daily trains began running
from Chadron to Lusk.
     Meanwhile the track-laying crews pushed on rapidly toward
Douglas. Railroad officials decided to make Douglas the end
of tracks for that year, and they authorized the sale of town
lots there for August 31. [9]    In addition to the towns of
Lusk and Douglas, several stations were located along the line
by the railroad through what would become Niobrara and
Converse counties, including Van Tassell, Node, Manville,
Keeline, Shawnee, Lost Springs (two miles west of the stone
culvert), Orin, and Irvine. Tracks reached Douglas by late
September 1886.
     The Chicago and North Western Railway Company was the
force behind the railroad expansion into Wyoming.         The
Fremont, Elkhorn, and Missouri Valley Railway and its
subsidiary, the Wyoming Central, were actually "leased lines"
of the Chicago and North Western; in 1902 the lines were
officially merged. [10]
     The Chicago and North Western Railway Company was first
organized on June 7, 1859, in Illinois and Wisconsin, with
William Butler Ogden as President. As the name implies, the
early goals of this railroad were to expand from Chicago to
the north and to the west. Through mergers and acquisitions,
the Chicago and North Western was successful in building west
across Illinois to Council Bluffs, Iowa, by 1867, thus
securing the lucrative contract for hauling the majority of
the supplies for the building of the Union Pacific Railroad.
With the assistance of John I. Blair, an independent railroad
speculator who acquired strategically located but weaker
railroad lines, the Chicago and North Western was able to
gradually expand westward across Iowa and Nebraska to Wyoming
Territory.   In fact, it was Blair who originally owned the
Fremont, Elkhorn, and Missouri Valley Railway and later leased
it to the Chicago and North Western. [11]
     The Chicago and North Western Railway, like many of its
competitors during the pioneering days of railroading,
realized that western expansion was imperative to inhibit
other railroads from building into and effectively controlling
new regions.    From 1881 to 1887, the number of miles of
railroad track in operation in the United States nearly
doubled. The Chicago and North Western undoubtedly envisioned
building a transcontinental route by connecting with existing
western lines, such as the Oregon Pacific or the Central
Pacific. As a result, the competing railroads built through
                               Chicago and North Western
                               Railroad Stone Culvert
                               HAER No. WY-53
                               (Page 7)
long stretches of generally unsettled land, luring emigrants
to the region and creating towns along the line to make the
operation profitable. Some coal deposits were known to exist
along the new Chicago and North Western line in Wyoming
Territory, such as at Glenrock, and others were found during
extensive surveys of the line. For example, the Lost Spring
coal fields (now abandoned) were serviced by a short branch
line built from the mainline. [12]
     The Chicago and North Western continued to extend its
lines westward along the North Platte River Valley, the most
favorable route from an engineering standpoint as well as for
future settlement and exploitation of the region along the
mainline. In 1887, the Wyoming Central expanded westward from
Douglas up the North Platte River Valley for a distance of
twenty nine miles to Deer Creek, and the new town of Glenrock
was established.    The following year, the Wyoming Central
built an additional 24.7 miles of track up the North Platte to
the site of Casper.
     In June 1887, Marvin Hughitt became the President of the
Chicago and North Western Railway.     To his contemporaries,
Hughitt became to the Chicago and North Western what James J.
Hill was to the Northern Pacific and Collis P. Huntington was
to the Southern Pacific. He served as its president from 1887
to 1910, during which time he operated a "one man road." From
1910 until 1925, he continued to serve as Chairman of the
Board and thus effectively retained control of the railroad
for a period of thirty-eight years. [13]
     Hughitt entered the presidency at a critical time for the
railroads.    First, the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887
established "just and reasonable" rates for interstate rail
carriers. Although this law ultimately proved difficult to
enforce,   the initial reaction of the railroads was
pessimistic,   and expansion programs were modified or
postponed. [14]    Coupled with the Financial Panic of 1893,
this caused the Chicago and North Western Railway to curtail
track expansion in Wyoming until the early twentieth century.
The sentiments of President Hughitt at this time are summed up
by his statement to "...stick to our knitting, [and] develop
this railroad in its present territory." [15]
     After a period of financial retrenchment, the Chicago and
North Western expanded 148 miles west from Casper to Shoshoni
and Riverton in 1905, taking advantage of the opening of
1,410,000 acres of the Wind River Indian Reservation to
settlement. The line was extended to Lander in 1906. Further
incentives for the track expansion were gold, copper, coal.
                               Chicago and North Western
                               Railroad Stone Culvert
                               HAER NO. WY-53
                               (Page 8)
and livestock in the region. The rather inflated estimates of
200,000 people living on the new lands in the Wind River
Valley was probably ample reason for the Chicago and North
Western to build the extension. Early plans approved by the
Board of Directors also show the line extending west to the
Wyoming-Idaho border.    These plans were later revised to a
line extending to the vicinity of Yellowstone National Park
via the Wind River and Dubois. However, these extensions were
never built. [16]
     The arrival of the railroad and the creation of the towns
of Douglas, Glenrock, and other smaller railroad communities
contributed to the rapid settlement and growth of the southern
Powder River Basin and North Platte River Valley. The area
was then    part of   Laramie   and   Albany counties, which
extended the length of Wyoming from north to south. However,
the county seats of Laramie and Cheyenne were located 150 to
200 miles to the south.    As a result, Converse County was
created on March 10, 1888, with Douglas as the county seat.
The new county covered over 6,740 square miles and at this
time also included Niobrara County, which did not become a
separate county until 1911. [17]
     Cattle and sheep ranching dominated the local economy of
Converse County throughout the remainder of the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. The oil industry became important
to the economy of the region when the Big Muddy Oil Field was
discovered in 1916 west of Glenrock along the south side of
the North Platte River. The Continental Oil Company and the
Midwest Refining Company, which operated in conjunction with
the Merritt Oil Corporation, began to systematically develop
the field. The Mutual Oil Company subsequently acquired the
interests of the Merritt Oil Corporation and built a refinery
on the west edge of Glenrock to process the Big Muddy oil.
The Continental Oil Company acquired the Mutual Oil Company
interests in the field and the refinery in the mid-1920s. A
short time after the first refinery was built, the Midwest
Refinery Company (Standard Oil Company of Indiana) built a
second refinery at Glenrock. The Big Muddy Oil Field became
one of the ten largest fields in Wyoming.     The Chicago and
North Western provided direct service to the refineries and
oil field. [18]
     The most intense period of settlement in Converse County
occurred after the passage of the Stock Raising Homestead Act
of 1916, under which a settler was able to file on 640 acres
of land that had been classified as "stock-raising lands" by
the Secretary of the Interior. Such lands were suitable only
for grazing and the raising of forage crops, did not have any
                               Chicago and North Western
                               Railroad Stone Culvert
                               HAER No. WY-53
                               (Page 9)
timber, and could not be irrigated. [19] As a result, within
six months after the law took effect, 712,000 acres of land in
Converse County were filed upon. The railroad and the State
of Wyoming also encouraged emigration to the arid, submarginal
lands. The growth of the dry land farming movement coincided
with the above factors to encourage settlement and farming on
these unwatered lands. During this period of time, there was
also increased immigration to the United States and an
increasing scarcity of good cheap farming land. During the
1920s, the size of homesteads in Wyoming nearly doubled and
the number of homesteads decreased, indicating a shift from
cash crops to livestock raising. [20]
     Agricultural prices began plummeting after 1920, and
farmers preceded the rest of the nation into the Depression by
using up their wartime profits on expansion instead of paying
off their mortgages. [21]     A series of severe droughts in
1930, 1931, 1934, 1936, and 1939 coincided with the worst
years of the Great Depression.        Failed homesteads were
converted to grazing lands; some became part of the Thunder
Basin National Grasslands, which now covers a large portion of
northeastern Converse County. Finally, in 1934, the Taylor
Grazing Act and two subseguent Executive Orders were passed
that withdrew the remaining public domain from entry, thus
virtually ending the homesteading era in this region.
     Meanwhile, the railroads had continued their expansion
into the region. Efficient transportation was essential to
the settlement and economic development of the region.     In
1913, the Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy (CB&Q) Railroad
built southward through Thermopolis and the Wind River Canyon
and reached Casper from the west, paralleling a long stretch
of the Chicago and North Western track. It continued eastward
through Glenrock and Douglas to Orin Junction, where it
rejoined the CB&Q network to the south, thus forming a north-
south linkage of the railroad system. In 1943, the Chicago
and North Western line west of Casper was abandoned and
salvaged, and their trains were run over the CB&Q line by
means of a consolidation agreement. [22]
     Finally in the early 1980s, in a joint effort with the
Burlington Northern Railroad, the portion of the Chicago and
North Western line from Shawnee on the west to Crandall on the
east (including the location of the stone culvert) was
reconstructed as part of a larger coal railroad line project
to serve the large strip mines in the Powder River Basin. The
light traffic that this portion of the line had been receiving
for many years was replaced by heavy coal train traffic. [23]
                                          Chicago and North Western
                                          Railroad Stone Culvert
                                          HAER No. WY-53
                                          (Page 10)

III.   CURRENT PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION
               The stone culvert was constructed in 1901 as inscribed on
          the keystone. A local newspaper commented on May 2 that "a
          number of stone masons have been here the past week building
          culverts and repairing bridges for the railroad company." [24]
               The stone culvert is located in an unnamed ephemeral
          drainage that flows into Lost Creek with low ridges to the
          north and south. At this point the Chicago and North Western
          Railroad tracks trend east-west, and the stone culvert runs
          nearly due north-south under the tracks and bed. U.S. Route
          18-20 is located a short distance to the south in an area of
          fill so that the level of the highway surface is above the
          culvert.
               The original stone culvert is sixty-seven feet long from
          the south to north face. It is constructed with quarried and
          shaped rectangular sandstone blocks with cement mortar. The
          south end of the culvert has flared end walls (12'3" long)
          that serve as retaining walls for fill. They are constructed
          with double rows of smaller sandstone blocks capped with
          larger stepped sandstone slabs.       The north end of the
          structure was originally constructed in an identical manner.
          The culvert portion has a keystone f arch that was originally
          eight feet high (now 7'8") and 6'l ' wide.    The interior is
          lined with mortared sandstone blocks that retain the arch
          shape throughout. The floor is flat and was originally lined
          with sandstone blocks. However, the blocks were covered with
          poured concrete sometime since 1979. Minor repairs have been
          made to the interior walls that are cracking and eroded. Some
          of the sandstone has fallen or sloughed off and disintegrates
          at the touch.
               In the early 1980s, the north end of the culvert was
          totally reconstructed with a rectangular-shaped box of poured
          concrete that increased the total length of the structure by
          44'6".   It was built onto the original north face, which
          appears to be still intact.     The box slopes downward in a
          northward direction from the original opening for a distance
          of 24'6" then levels out for the remainder of its length. The
          exposed end is composed of poured concrete wing walls and a
          concrete cap.
                                       Chicago and North Western
                                       Railroad Stone Culvert
                                       HAER No. WY-53
                                       (Page 11)

IV.   ENDNOTES
       1.   Dena S. Markoff, Cultural Resource Inventory: An Histori-
            cal Overview of the Antelope Coal Field, Converse County.
            Wyoming (Boulder, Colorado: Report prepared by Western
            Cultural Resource Management, Inc., for NERCO, Inc.,
            Portland, Oregon, 1980):14-22.
       2.   Garry Hogg, Union Pacific (New York:   Walker and Company,
            1967):18.
       3.   T.A. Larson, History of Wyoming (Lincoln: University of
            Nebraska Press, 1978):37.
       4.   Wesley S. Griswold, A Work of Giants (McGraw-Hill Book
            Company, Inc., 1962):62-75; Larson, History of Wyoming,
            pp. 37-38; U.S. Congress, House, "Letter from the
            Secretary of the Interior" (transmitting reports in
            relation to the Union Pacific Railroad). 43rd Cong.,
            1st sess., Vol. 9, House Executive Document No. 95
            (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1873):6.
       5.   Markoff, Historical Overview of the Antelope Coal Field,
            pp. 36-40.
       6.   The Democratic Leader. Cheyenne, Wyoming, 3/20/1886.
       7.   The Democratic Leader. Cheyenne, Wyoming, 6/13/1886.
       8.   The Democratic Leader. Cheyenne, Wyoming, 1/19, 3/24,
            5/11, 6/16/1886.
       9.   The Democratic Leader. Cheyenne, Wyoming, 7/17, 7/24,
            8/13/1886.
      10.   Robert J. Casey and W.A.S. Douglas, Pioneer Railroad. The
            Storv of the Chicago and North Western System (New York:
            McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1948):224.
      11.   Ibid., p. 126.
      12.   Douglas Kullen, Historical Background Study for the Orin
            to Sean Cohee Railroad Line Abandonment Converse and
            Natrona Counties Wyoming (Glen Ellyn, Illinois: Patrick
            Engineering, Inc.; report prepared for Chicago & North
            Western Transportation Company, Chicago, Illinois, 1990)
            pp. 10, 19-20.
                                      Chicago and North Western
                                      Railroad Stone Culvert
                                      HAER No. WY-53
                                      (Page 12)
     13.   Casey and Douglas, Pioneer Railroad, pp. 137-138.
     14.   Richard C. Overton, Burlington Route: A History of the
           Burlington Lines. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965): 204-
           214.
     15.   E. M. Lewis, Chicago and North Western RY. and the Pro-
           jected West Coast Extension. 1904-1906 (MSS #914, typed
           manuscript dated 1964; Historic Research and Publications
           Unit, Division of Parks and Cultural Resources, Wyoming
           Department of Commerce, Cheyenne):4.
     16.   Ibid., p. 5.
     17.   Markoff, Historical Overview of the Antelope Coal Field,
           p. 44.
     18.   Paul Biggs and Ralph H. Espach, Petroleum and Natural Gas
           Fields in Wyoming. U.S. Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 582
           (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1960):29-32;
           Ralph H. Espach and H. Dale Nichols, Petroleum and
           Natural-Gas Fields in Wyoming. U.S. Bureau of Mines
           Bulletin No. 418 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing
           Office, 1941):14; D.W. Greenburg, "Converse County's Mag-
           nificent Resources," Midwest Review 7 (August 1926) No. 8:
           50-52.
     19.   Wyoming State Planning Board, Public Domain in Wyoming
           (Cheyenne: Wyoming State Planning Board, 1938):118.
     20.   Janet LeCompte and Jane L. Anderson, History of Northern
           Campbell County and the Rawhide Mine Permit Area, Wyoming
           (Longmont, Colorado: Pioneer Archaeological Consultants;
           report prepared for Department of Environmental Quality,
           Land Quality Division, Cheyenne, Wyoming, 1982):D-2-132-
           33.
     21.   James C. olsen, History of Nebraska (Lincoln: University
           of Nebraska Press, 1955):296.
     22.   Kullen, Historical Background Study, p. 2; Larson,
           History of Wyoming, pp. 340, 483.
     23.   Idem; Letter dated April 14, 1980, from William E.
           Loftus, Associate Administrator for Federal Assistance,
           Department of Transportation, Federal Railroad
           Administration, Washington, D.C., to Jan L. Wilson,
/-         Director, Wyoming Recreation Commission,
           Cheyenne, Wyoming.
                                     Chicago and North Western
                                     Railroad Stone Culvert
                                     HAER No. WY-53
                                     (Page 13)
24.   Converse County Heraldf Lusk, Wyoming, 5/2/1901. Note:
      According to Jack Mullen of the Chicago and North Western
      Transportation Company, Chicago, Illinois, the railroad no
      longer retains any historical records or plans concerning the
      stone culvert at milepost 514.23.       A Historical Resource
      Report was written in 1980 by Madison Madison International of
      Cleveland, Ohio, concerning several keystone arch stone
      culverts between Van Tassell and Shawnee, Wyoming, and the
      Lusk Water Tower. However, no copies of that report have been
      retained or could be located by the Chicago and North Western
      Transportation Company, Madison Madison International, or the
      Wyoming SHPO.
     Chicago and North Western
     Railroad Stone Culvert
     HAER No. WY-53
     (Page 14)




r~
                                  Chicago and North Western
                                  Railroad Stone Culvert
                                  HAER No. WY-53
                                  (Page 15)


                                                  tlte/Urn Mth -fitad*.




                                               — Mader* exTAyisftn




                                          tfrf^/fltj rtorfji e+jj




4?preX- hubtien ££. -fr^ce*   V                                            i i    i


                                           0r/$jrf&j stffmc dutwrf



                                         Oridrid dtione &roh



dhitetf 4A/errh Western £.£.
 ^0ne> ttt/verf fit*/03Z8)

 Q) ztakt (F2O± e*f 7?z O




                                                                    -tO'         2D'
j/ijhufiMf 6t*rb ^L.




       t/6 */#¥■ /S'ZQ
        Chicago and North Western
        Railroad Stone Culvert
        HAER No. WY-53
        (Page 16)




-M'2'
