      le Bridge (Mnth Street Bridge)                         HAER No. WI-57
Over the Yellow River
Towns of Armenia and Necedah
Juneati County      : .
Wisconsin




                                 PHOTOGRAPHS
                   WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                    HISTORICAL AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                             National Park Service
                         Rocky Mountain Regional Office
                           Department of the Interior
                                P.O. Box 25287
                            Denver, Colorado 80225
                                                            Wi€»
                 HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                                            / -

                  Bpraque Bridge (9th Street Bridge)
                            HAER No. WI-57


Location:             Spanning the Yellow River, carrying traffic
                      from 9th Street East, between the towns of
                      Armenia and Necedah, Juneau County,
                      Wisconsin.
                      UTM: 15.731250.4891476
                      Quad: New Miner

Date of Construction: 1913
Bridge Fabricator:    The Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company
                      Elkhart, Indiana
Present Owner:        Towns of Armenia and Necedah
Present Use:          Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic
Significance:         The Sprague bridge is one of the state's
                      finest remaining, unaltered, examples of a
                      Pratt half-hip pony truss. The two span
                      structure is one of the earliest bridges
                      constructed under the auspices of the State
                      Highway Commission. The bridge fabricator,
                      The Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company of
                      Indiana and the local contractor, Willis E.
                      Gifford were prolific independent bridge
                      builders in Wisconsin.




Historian:            Edwin G. Cordes
                      For Mead and Hunt Inc
                      Madison, Wisconsin
                      March, 1989
                                                               The Sprague Bridge
                                                               HAER No. WI-57
                                                                (Page 2 )


      The Sprague Bridge is a two span, pinned, steel, Pratt half-
hip pony truss bridge which carries Ninth Street East across the
Yellow River between Necedah and Armenia townships. It was built
by the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company through its agent, Willis
E. Gif ford,     in 1913.     With the pin connections and steel tube
abutments, the Sprague Bridge is representative of a rural, turn-
of-the-century wagon bridge.             It was most likely built with a
minimum of power tools, and is one of the last pin connected Pratt
highway bridges built in the state.            The State Highway Commission,
formally established in 191X, two years before the Sprague Bridge
was   constructed,    advocated      riveted      Warren     truss    bridges   and
concrete abutments for this type of crossing.2
      Each of the two spans has a length of 58' 8".                   The overall
structure length is 121*7". The roadway width is 15' and the web
height is 5'4".      The bridge superstructure utilizes "built-up"
sections composed of various sized angle irons and channels. The
bridge deck is composed of bituminous material and is supported by
a   corrugated    metal     deck   and   rolled     I-beam    floor    beams    and
stringers. The span bears on metal capped steel tubes surrounded
by steel diaphragm retaining walls at both the abutments and
central pier. This type of a steel abutment represents a very late
use of the technology.       Standard roller type expansion bearings can
be found at the retaining wall connections of both spans.
      The basic Pratt truss design was patented by Thomas and Caleb
Pratt in 1844 as a combination wood and iron bridge. The design
soon evolved into an all iron or steel configuration. As an all
metal bridge, the design became extremely popular because of its
                                                      The Sprague Bridge
                                                      HAER No. WI-57
                                                      (Page 3 )


ease of erection and        its sparse use of materials. The oldest
existing truss bridge in Wisconsin, the 1877 White River Bridge in
Burlington, is a Pratt.3 The Pratt truss configuration places the
diagonal   members     in   tension   and   the   vertical   members   in
compression,   except for the hip verticals which run from the
inclined endposts and top chord connections and are in tension. A
Pratt Half-hip bridge, like the Sprague example, does not have a
hip vertical member.
     Bridge plates     attached to    the   outside   inclined   endposts
identify The Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company, Elkhart Indiana as
the builder and W.E. Gifford of Madison WI as the agent. A second
set of bridge plates also recognizes the Armenia Town Supervisors
as well as the Juneau County Supervisors* committee of oversight
for their involvement in the project.4
     An interesting feature of the bridge is the             lower chord
members. The exterior panels on each span utilize double tied angle
irons while the two interior panels use looped eye-bars. The first
technique is representative of 20th century technology, while the
looped eye-bars represent earlier 19th century technology.
     The Sprague Bridge crosses        the Yellow River which      flows
generally from north to south eventually joining the Pentenwell
Flowage and the Wisconsin River to the southeast. The surrounding
area is primarily wooded wetland and floodplain. The closest town
is Sprague, located one mile northwest of the bridge. Established
as a post office along the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad
around 1909,   the town is located nine miles north of Necedah.
Census record show that Spragu« has 75 residents in 1913 and 100
                                                         The Sprague Bridge
                                                         HAER No. WI-57
                                                         (Page 4 )


in 1919.5


Willis E, Gifford
       A   plate    attached    to the     Sprague   bridge   identifies   the
involvement of Willis E. Gifford in the construction of the span.
As one of almost 100 small independent bridge builders in the state
during this period, Gifford is significant for a number of reasons.
His success, which continued for over twenty years, runs counter
to the short-lived professions of most of the other builders.
Perhaps more is known of Gifford than any other builder through a
personal photo album and scrap book as well as written reports of
his work. As an agent for the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company for
almost a quarter of a century, Willis Gifford was responsible for
the construction of numerous bridges throughout the upper midwest,
more    specifically     Wisconsin.   He    was   representative   of   small
independent bridge contractors who operated throughout the state
during the period from 1870 to 1930.           Perhaps more is known about
Gifford1s career than any other small bridge builder / agent thus
making him an important individual in the history of Wisconsin
bridge building.
       The thirty years following 1900 saw radical changes occur in
the process of bridge construction and fabrication. Like the steel
industry    in     general,    the bridge    building   industry   began   to
consolidate itself into a number of large companies such as the
American Bridge Company, near Chicago. By the 1920*s these larger
companies virtually       controlled the marketplace,         making bridge
fabrication and erection by small entrepreneurs difficult. Gifford
                                                        The Sprague Bridge
                                                        HAER NO. WI-57
                                                        (Page 5 )


business, as an exception to the rule, continued to operate until
the late 1920's.
     Another factor contributing to the decline of the smaller
fabricating and erection firms was the establishment of the State
Highway   Commission    in   1911.   this    organization   which will    be
discussed   in   more   detail   later,      became   responsible   for   the
development of a unified state highway network. The duties included
the development of standardized bridge plans. This standardization
of construction gave larger fabrication firms an advantage by
allowing them to easily produce bridge according to set designs
more cheaply than the smaller more individualized firms. Despite
these difficulties, Gifford's business continued to be somewhat
profitable until    at least     1929,      a point at which his bridge
contract work tapered off possible due to the Depression.
     Willis E. Gifford was born in 1867 in New York City. After
marrying and moving to Michigan, he arrived in Madison about
1900. Gifford's early work in the area included the sale of road
graders and other machinery throughout the state.6 A photo album
listing bridges he was involved with shows that Gifford was acting
as an agent for the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company, well before
he officially lists his occupation as bridge contractor and agent,
in 1916.7 Before this time, Gifford's occupation is listed only as
travelling salesman. Madison City directories continued to list
Gifford as an agent for Elkhart Bridge and Iron until 1931.
     According to the builder's son, Willis E. Gifford Jr., his
father was rarely involved in the actual construction of the
bridges he contracted for. Gifford's role included submitting bids,
                                                The Sprague Bridge
                                                HAER No. WI-57
                                                (Page 6 )


attending the lettings and arranging for the contracts. Once he had
received a contract he notified Elkhart Bridge and Iron Co. to
begin fabrication and hired a job foreman. Foremen often involved
in Gifford's contracts included Ed Rudd, George Sarbarker, or H.C.
"Duff" Fagan. The later may have worked for Elkhart Bridge and Iron
elsewhere. The foremen then hired the construction crews and were
in-charge of the actual erection.8
     Most of Gifford's early bridges were pony trusses, either pin
connected Pratts or riveted Warrens. The longest known bridge that
Gifford contracted for was a 150 foot Pratt overhead truss over the
Peshtigo River in Marinette County, Wisconsin.9 Gifford did arrange
for repair work on larger structures. He also constructed numerous
smaller I-beam and concrete girder bridges throughout the state.
It is not known if the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company was involved
in the fabrication of these projects. °
     Gifford's son noted that although his father was an aggressive
and resourceful   agent,   he never made much money as a bridge
contractor.   Gifford's business was most prolific in the years
before World War I when he was involved in as many as 70 contracts
a year. Although the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company survived at
least the early years of the depression, Gifford's involvement in
bridge building ended around    1930. He died in Madison    in the
1940's.11


The Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company
     The Elkhart Bridge and     Iron Company was   incorporated   in
Indiana in November, 1901. This date was late in the third phase
                                                       The Sprague Bridge
                                                       HAER No. WI-57
                                                       (Page 7 )


of   industrial    development   of    Indiana's   metal bridge     building
history,    a period which has been termed an age of "industrial
expansion" for these companies. This period of expansion lasted
roughly     from   1889-1902,    and   was   marked   by    a   change     from
experimentation in design to a focus on efficient fabrication.
Elkhart Bridge and Iron was one of eight important bridge companies
formed in Indiana during this period.
      The two principle founders of the Elkhart Bridge Company were
Frank Brumbaugh and John Fieldhouse. Brumbaugh was formally an
agent for the Bellefontaine Bridge Company of Ohio. Fieldhouse, a
local Elkhart industrialist joined the partnership to boost the
local economy. The company did not prosper until it was reorganized
in 1906 as the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company.                 By 1910,   the
company employed 125 people and earned $40,000.00 annually. The
company*s influence exceeded the boundaries of Indiana as they were
known to have built bridges in Montana as well as Wisconsin.13
      Elkhart Bridge and Iron Co. used the method of shop erection
and disassembly of its bridges before shipping them to the site.
This method, which varies from the more modern template system
would have made Gifford's role more tenable since he was familiar
with the company's construction processes.14 Elkhart prided itself
in the ornamental details of its bridge designs, but the remaining
Wisconsin examples do not display much ornamentation. After the
company's    re-organization,     Elkhart    Bridge   and   Iron   began    to
diversify, and its business began to include the manufacture of
steel for building construction.15
     Both the Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company and Willis Gifford's
                                                   The Sprague Bridge
                                                   HAER NO. WI-57
                                                   (Page 8 )


involvement with them is significant in the history of Wisconsin
bridge building because their prosperity occurred as the industry
was radically changing direction. Shortly after the turn of the
century, the American Bridge Company was formed by "an immense
merger of virtually all of the national bridge fabricators of the
time", including the Milwaukee Bridge and Iron Company* According
to one historian,       the creation of the American Bridge Company
radically changed the complexion of the entire industry.16 In this
period   of   huge   mergers   and   standardization   of   design   and
fabrication it became increasingly difficult for an independent
bridge manufacturer to continue to prosper. The Wisconsin Historic
Bridge Advisory Committee has identified the Elkhart Bridge and
Iron Company as a "known prolific out-of-state builder", the second
highest ranking accorded to bridge companies on its rating scale.17


Design and Engineering
     There are three essential aspects of a truss. First, a truss
is a combination of relatively small members which are "framed or
joined...to act as a beam".18 Second,       each component member is
subjected only to tension or compression. (Tensile forces tend to
stretch or elongate a member while compressive forces tend to push
or compress a member.) Third, the component members of the truss
are configured in triangles because "the triangle is the only
geometrical figure in which the form is changed only by changing
the lengths of the sides."19 In other words, the triangle remains
rigid until the forces applied distort or break the materials used
in th«* components,20
                                                         The Sprague Bridge
                                                         HAER No. WI-57
                                                         (Page 9 )


       A truss bridge consists of two trusses, each with a top chord,
bottom chord, and endposts. The space enclosed by these members is
called the web. The web members reinforce the truss. The particular
arrangement of the web members was the subject of                much study in
the mid and late nineteenth century, and different names were given
to trusses with different web configurations, the two most popular
types of trusses in Wisconsin were the Pratt and the Warren.
       Truss bridges are generally divided into three categories:
pony    or   low   trusses,    overhead   or   through   trusses,    and   deck
trusses.21 Both pony and overhead trusses carry the traffic between
the trusses and the roadway is at or near the bottom chord. A deck
truss carries the roadway at or near the top chord; thus, the
roadway is on top of the trusses.


Materials
       The   relative   merits    of cast versus     wrought      iron bridge
building were still being debated in the late 19th century, when
the    first surge of truss bridge building began              in Wisconsin.
Because cast iron is so brittle,           it is subject to sudden and
dramatic failure.       Thus   it was "an unsatisfactory material           for
                                                            22
bridges, and quite a number of failures occurred."                Shunned for
a time in the United States in the 1850's, cast iron bridges made
a comeback and then only "gradually but stubbornly," fell out of
favor.23 As late as 1870,         one bridge engineer wrote that           "the
rigidity of cast iron is the very quality needed in a compression
member." Moreover, as the quality of casting in the United States
was excellent, "nothing can be found that will compare with cast
                                                               The Sprague Bridge
                                                               HAER No. WI-57
                                                               (Page 10 )


iron for resisting strains of compression either in reliability or
cost.1'24
       Before      the   issue   of   cast   versus     wrought   iron    had     been
completely resolved,         a new material entered the picture: steel.
Steel was not a newly discovered material, of course, but high cost
and small output had limited its use mainly to the manufacture of
tools. The Bessemer and Siemens-Martin processes reduced the costs
and greatly improved the quantity of structural steel available.25
Steel was used for special purposes and special bridges beginning
with the Eads Bridge in St. Louis in 1874. From the late 1880* s to
the early 1890's structural shapes (beams and columns) were rolled
in both wrought iron and steel by the maj or manufacturers. The
quantities and quality of steel remained controversial until the
turn of the century, and engineers continued to debate the relative
merits of the two metals.26 Nevertheless, steel was the predominant
if not the exclusive structural materials for bridges by the mid
1890's.      Although some       bridge building companies            continued    to
advertise bridges built of either metal as late as 1900, after 1892
wrought iron structural shapes were no longer being produced.
       In the 2 0th century,          the continued development of steel
focused on alloys. Waddell devoted an entire chapter to alloy
steels in his 1916 textbook and its 1921 sequel.28 By 1921, one
English engineer indicated that developments since the turn of the
century had made both the "mild" steel of the 1890's and wrought
iron   old    fashioned.     Both     the    engineer    and    the   metallurgist
developed     an    increasingly      sophisticated      understanding     of     the
variations which resulted from changes in the chemical composition,
                                                     The Sprague Bridge
                                                     HAER No. WI-57
                                                     (Page 11 )


heat treatment, macrostructure and microstructure.         Because the
major advantage of alloy steels lay in very long span bridges and
welded connections, the latter feature not becoming common until
after World War II, it is assumed that metallurgical developments
were not a major concern for bridge engineers designing modest
rural bridges such as the ones which predominate the current
existing sample in Wisconsin.30


Historical Context
      On Wisconsin highways, the predominance of metal truss bridges
for crossings of all lengths seems to have lasted from about 1890
to 1910. Trusses remained an important bridge type in the state
until the advent of World War II,      but after 1910, most short
crossings (less than 35 feet) employed girder, beam or slab spans
of steel and/or concrete. The Wisconsin State Highway Commission
(SHC) ,   established in 1911 to improve the quality of road and
bridge construction in the state, was particularly enthusiastic
about using concrete for culverts and small bridges.31
      The "bowstring" truss may have been the state's first, common,
all   metal   truss   configuration.   Nationwide,     thousands   were
apparently built, but the popularity of this design in Wisconsin
is difficult to determine.32 Although records of a number of them
exist, none remain on Wisconsin Highways. Seven are preserved in
parks and wildlife refuges.33
      The two truss designs that came to dominate highway bridge
construction by the late nineteenth century were the Warren and the
Pratt. The Warren truss was patented by two British engineers in
                                                          The Sprague Bridge
                                                          HAER No. WI-57
                                                          (Page 12 )


184 0.    In this design, the vertical members handle only nominal
stress, while the diagonals serve as both tension and compression
members. The vertical members, like the diagonals, were usually
paired angles, but of smaller dimension                In Wisconsin, Warren
trusses are by far the most common form of highway truss, having
. been promoted by the SHC after 1911.            Of the approximately 450
Warren trusses remaining in the state in 1980, over four-fifths
were riveted pony trusses built according to SHC plans.34
         The Pratt truss, patented by Caleb and Thomas Pratt in 1844,
features vertical compression members and diagonal tension members.
During the 1870's, an important variation of the Pratt design was
introduced      for long-span bridges.       Because the depth of truss
required      in the center     of     a bridge   is   greater than    at   the
abutments, a considerable amount of material can be saved on a long
span      structure   by   "bending"    the top   chord   into   a   polygonal
configuration known as a Parker truss. If the top chord has exactly
five sides, the bridge by convention, is called a Camelback truss.
The addition of substruts and/or subties makes a Pratt into a
Baltimore and a Parker into a Pennsylvania.35
         The development of the Pratt and its variations was influenced
by a debate over the merits of pin connections versus riveted
connections for main truss members. Proponents of riveted bridges
usually cited the advantages of increased structural rigidity and
the reduction of damaging vibrations. In pin connected bridges,
vibrations caused the pin to grind on the eye-bar, thus enlarging
the pin hole. Advocates of pin connected bridges, on the other
hand, emphasized the theoretically correct distribution of stresses
                                                           The Sprague Bridge
                                                           HAER No. WI-57
                                                           (Page 13 )


and the reduced amount of metal required. They also criticized the
difficulty   of    ensuring      that   a    riveted     joint    was    properly
fabricated, especially in the field. The pin-connected bridge, they
argued, was the reason why Americans surpassed the rest of the
world in bridge building.36
      The issue of pin versus riveted connections was complicated
by   practical    factors,    including      machinery,    tools,       and   power
sources, both in the shop and in the field. The debate also was
easily sidetracked by tangential issues, as, for example, when some
commentators denied that the pin per se was the most important
feature of "characteristically American" bridgework. In addition,
both connection types came to incorporate features that were not
an intrinsic part of the design. Many early riveted spans, for
example,   used   the   lattice girder        (or multiple       triangulation)
design, which was clearly excessive in material, while many pin-
connected bridges were dangerously light, particularly in their
details. Thus, a fair comparison between the two systems was not
always made.37
     According     to   J.A.L.    Waddell,     the     controversy      raged   in
engineering circles for a dozen years around the turn of the
century. No dramatic resolution of the issue occurred, but "time
and steady development of the real science of bridge designing"
gradually changed minds. Significant changes in riveting technology
also altered the terms of the debate.38 A compromise of sorts was
finally reached, resulting in the adoption of the best features of
each design. Riveted bridges were designed with less duplication
of members and pin-connected bridges were still accepted for long
                                                                   The Sprague Bridge
                                                                   HAER No. WI-57
                                                                   (Page 14 )


span highway bridges.
        In     Wisconsin,      SHC     officials       clearly      favored     riveted
construction from an early date.                    Consequently,    the distinction
between pin connections and riveted connections establishes an
important        sub-category boundary,             separating the era of state
planned bridges from the preceding period in which bridge companies
were largely responsible for bridge design. As early as 1908, state
engineers advocated the use of riveted pony trusses for short-span
bridges.40 When the SHC was                  formally established in 1911,            the
riveted Warren became the state's standard pony design. In that
year, the SHC also drafted a standard plan for riveted, overhead,
Pratt    trusses,        and   by    1914,    the agency      had    adopted    riveted
construction for all overhead Pratt variations. As SHC engineer
A.R. Hirst wrote in 1913, "very seldom do we use a pin-connected
truss. ..".A1
        In     the    mid-193 0's,    the     SHC    seems   to    have   developed     a
preference for overhead Warren trusses for long span bridges,
although some overhead Pratts continued to be built.                           Riveting
remained dominant in bridge building until well after World War II.
as late as 1931, the construction specifications of the American
Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) stated, "Welding of
steel shall not be done except to remedy minor defects and then
only with the approval of the engineer." As with other innovations,
the     full     potential     of     welded     bridges     was    not    immediately
recognized.          Shortly   thereafter,       riveting    rapidly      disappeared,
replaced by welding and high strength bolts.42
                                                                             The Sprague Bridge
                                                                             HAER No. WI-57
                                                                             (Page 15 )


The Wisconsin State Highway Commission (SHC)
        The    involvement        of     local    governments                in    bridge       repair,
replacement, and construction projects was the subject of numerous
laws in the late 19th century. With the "Good Roads Movement" of
the late 1890's and early 1900's, a specific set of proposals were
put forth for greater involvement by the State government in
promoting good quality bridges/3
        In 1907, the Wisconsin state legislature established a Highway
Division within the Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey
to     conduct     experiments          in     road    design          and    to       advise     local
governments about specific projects. The Highway Division began to
develop       an   entire        set    of     standardized             bridge         plans.      Town
governments,        traditionally            reluctant          to     hire       an    independent
engineer to assist in bridge building, could now avail themselves
of free engineering counsel from the state. At the same time, the
legislature required counties to make a commitment to professional
oversight and increased funding by appointing "a competent engineer
or     experienced        road     builder"           to       serve     as       County    Highway
Commissioner and by levying a tax of not less than one-fourth nor
more    than two mills on the assessed valuation of all county
property for the county road and bridge fund.*4
       In 1908, Wisconsin voters removed the greatest obstacle to
creating a progressive state-wide system of bridge and highway
construction.        In    that        year,     by        a   three-to-one            margin,      the
eliminated the state's constitutional prohibition against direct
state aid to transportation projects. When the legislature made its
first appropriation for highway improvements in 1911,                                       it also
                                                           The Sprague Bridge
                                                           HAER No. WI-57
                                                           (Page 16 )


transformed the Highway Division of the Geological Survey into an
autonomous State Highway Commission (SHC), which was given the
responsibility of overseeing the expenditure of state funds for the
development of a state highway network.
        Like the former Highway Division, the SHC emphasized the use
of standardized plans for various types of bridges and culverts.46
The first set of standardized truss plans encompassed spans ranging
from 36 to 128 feet, generally in five-foot increments. All but one
had a sixteen-foot roadway. Revised several times by the 192O's,
these plans gradually provided for wider bridges, and continually
incorporated the latest engineering wisdom and detailing.
        In the first three and one half years of work,                the SHC
designed over 1,500 bridges of all types. All were designed to
carry a live load of 15 tons. Believing firmly in the use of
reinforced concrete to "the fullest extent practical," the SHC was
pleased that all but three of their designs had concrete floors.
These     figures   include    almost     900   bridges   requested by      local
governments in 70 counties. Practically all the local bridges in
the state during these years were either designed by the SHC or
were based on SHC standard plans.
        Despite its enthusiastic support for concrete construction,
the SHC declared in 1926 that the steel bridge "is not looked upon
with disfavor," and it continued to refine its truss designs. In
the     late   193 O's,   it   made   a   major    commitment   to   keep     its
standardized plans up to date by dropping the Pratt truss design
in favor of the Warren all overhead truss configurations. Newly-
completed SHC-designed truss bridges, both monumental and modest,
                                                  The Sprague Bridge
                                                  HAER No. WI-57
                                                  (Page 17 )


also continued to be featured in the photographic sections of the
agency1s biennial reports. Nevertheless, the SHC clearly favored
concrete   spans,   citing   advantages   of   lower   cost,   greater
compatibility with aesthetic treatment, and greater adaptability
to remodelling, especially in terms of roadway widening.49 The metal
truss, however, remained cost effective in many situations, and the
SHC continued to design some truss bridges until well after World
War II.
      During its early years,    the SHC was guided by five        key
figures, all of whom had previously worked at the Highway Division
of the Geological Survey. These staff members were W.O. Hotchkiss,
first chief of the Highway Division; Arthur R. Hirst, first State
Highway Engineer; Martin W. Torkelson, first State Bridge Engineer;
Herbert C. Fuelling, assistant highway engineer; and Walter C.
Buetow, assistant bridge engineer. When these men moved on to the
SHC, they found a helpful ally in Frederick E. Turneaure. Turneaure
was   Dean of the College of Engineering       at the University of
Wisconsin and had been instrumental in establishing the new state
highway agency.50
                                                The Sprague Bridge
                                                HAER No. WI-57
                                                (Page 18 )


                             Endnotes


l.The Gifford photograph album shows horse and human power being
used on such projects.    Wisconsin Department of Transportation
records list 40 of the state's 125 Pratt half-hip pony trusses as
being built in 1915 or later. Research on some of them indicates
that it is likely that for most of these bridges, either the date
of construction was wrongly guessed at or the bridges were moved
to their current site after 1915 and the date listed in the files
as being the date of the date of construction is actually the date
of the move.
2. A.R. Hirst, "Bridges and Culverts for County Roads," Engineering
News (October 9, 1913, p. 729. with minor modifications, these
standards are reiterated in Wisconsin Highway Commission, Second
Biennial Report, p.24)
3. For a more detailed history of the White River Bridge        in
Burlington Wisconsin, refer to Diane Kromm "White River Bridge"
Historic American Engineering Record. HAER No. WI-21, unpublished
1987.
4. A builders plate    is mounted on the southwest endpost and
identifies Gifford1s role in the project. A second plate mentioning
the supervisors is mounted on the northeast endpost. The Armenia
Town Supervisors identified were, Ole Norsby, Al Gorman, and George
A. Mayhue. The Juneau County Supervisors were E.P. Rogers and
George H. Livernash.
5.Wisconsin State Gazetteer and Business Directory. R.L. Polk &
Co., Chicago, 1901-10, p. 1192; 1913-14, p. 1013; 1919-20, p. 1137.
No listings for Sprague in Juneau County were found for 1901 to
1906* The volume for 1907-08 was not located. Wisconsin Blue Book,
1911, Madison, pp. 71,101. It is interesting to note that the town
of Armenia!s population declined during this period, from 837 in
1905 to 714 in 1910. This decrease is also reflected in the overall
figures for Juneau County during this period.
6.Mss. Census, 1900, Enumeration District 47, sheet 1, line 62;
Mss. Census. 1910, Enumeration District 64, sheet 6, line 94.
Interview with Willis E. Gifford Jr. - Robert S. Newbery, October
5. 1987. Before moving to Michigan, Gifford married Elbertine Swan.
7.G.R. Angell & Company, Madison City Directory. Vol. 14, 1916,
pp. 184, 627; Madison Directory Company, Madison city Directory.
1916, p. 301; Madison City Directory, 1931, p. 326.
                                                  The Sprague Bridge
                                                  HAER No. WI-57
                                                  (Page 19 )


8.Interview with Willis E.    Gifford,   Jr.   - Robert S.   Newbery,
October 1987.
9.Historic American Engineering report WI-58, The Ferndale Road
Bridge. This Pratt overhead bridge was also built by Gifford and
Elkhart Bridge and Iron Company in 1910.
10.Gifford photo album.
ll.Gifford's son could not remember the exact year but calculated
it would have been shortly after World War II.
12,James L. Cooper, Iron Monuments to Distant Posterity, Indiana's
Metal Bridges. 1870-1930, DePauw University, 1987, pp. 22-32.
Curiously, Elkhart Bridge and Iron is not mentioned in either
Anthony Deahl, ed. , A Twentieth Century History & Biographical
Record of Elkhart County, Indiana, New York, 1905, pp.235-42; or
in Abraham E. Weaver, ed., A Standard History of Elkhart County,
Indiana, Vol. 1 New York, 1916, pp. 268-75.
13.Cooper, Iron Monuments, pp. 29-30; Frederick L. Quivik, Historic
Bridges in Montana, Historic American Engineering Record, National
Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Spring 1982.
14.Cooper, Iron Monuments, pp.29-30. The template method is assumed
to be a more modern fabrication technique. Charles Evan Fowler,
"Machinery in Bridge Erection," Cassier's Magazine, Vol. XVII, No.
4 (February 1900), pp.327-9. See also, Robert S. Newbery, Jeffrey
A. Hess, and Robert F. Frame, III, Truss Bridges, Vol. II, Historic
Bridges in Wisconsin, Wisconsin Department of Transportation, to
be published in 1988.
15.Cooper, Iron Monuments, pp. 29-30.
16.Clayton Fraser, Historic Bridges of Colorado, eds., Rebecca
Herbst and Vicki Rottman, Colorado Department of Highways,1986, p.
11.
17.Barbara Wyatt, Proj. Dir.,"Iron and Steel Truss Highway
Bridges", cultural Resource Management in Wisconsin: Vol. 2, The
State Historical Society of Wisconsin. (June 1986), pp.12-1, 12-
29. This report summarizes the findings of the state Historic
Bridge Advisory Commission's (HBAC) study of truss bridges in
Wisconsin including their ranking scale and listing of eligible
structures.
                                                The Sprague Bridge
                                                HAER No. WI-57
                                                (Page 20 )


18.Johnson, Bryan and Turneaure, Modern Framed Structures, p. 3.
In other words, the "assemblage had rigidity and behaved as a
unit." Ellis 1. Armstrong, History of Public Works in the United
States, 1776-1976. American Public Works Association, 1976, p. 109.
19.Milo S.Ketchum, Design of Highway Bridges, p.l
2 0.A rectangle, on the other hand, can become a parallelogram as
everyone with a sagging screen door knows. The common solution to
the sagging door is to run a small rod diagonally across it, thus
creating two triangles. The resulting figure looks remarkably like
one panel of a 19th century Pratt truss
21.American Association for State and Local History Technical
Leaflet 95, History News, Vol. 32, No. 5, May 1977: T. Allan Comp
and Donald Jackson, "Bridge Truss Types: A Guide to Dating and
Identifying," 5, 6-7. Ketchum, Design of Highway Bridges, pp. 5-11.
22.James A. L. Waddell, Bridge Engineering, New York, 1925, p. 16.
2 3.Theodore Cooper, "The Use of Steel for Bridges", American
Society of Civil Engineers, Transactions, Vol. VIII (October,
1879), p. 265. Important railroad bridges in the United States were
built of cast iron in the 1870fs and thousands of short span cast
iron girder bridges were still in use on the railroads in England
and Wales as late as 1896. Waddell, Bridge Engineering, pp. 17, 24;
Tyrrell, History of Bridge Engineering, p. 151.
24.Captain William E. Merrill, Iron Truss Bridges for Railroads,
New York, 1870, p. 126.
25.Bessemer's initial claims of tons rather than pounds was met
with scepticism but, after some initial disappointments, proved
true. Douglas A. Fisher, The Epic of Steel, New York, 1963, p. 117.
26.David Plowden, Bridges: The Spans of North America, New York,
1974, pp.125-7; Fisher, Epic of Steel, p.103; Herbert W. Ferris,
editor, Rolled Shapes: Historical Record - Dimensions and
Properties - Steel and Wrought Iron Beams and Columns, American
Institute of Steel Construction, New York, 1953.
27.A number of companies, including Wisconsin Bridge and Iron,
continued to advertise both iron and steel bridges until the end
of the century. See the advertisements for Wisconsin Bridge and
Iron Company, in Polk's Wisconsin State Gazetteer and Business
Directory,_ 1895-96, p. 687, and Wrought Iron Bridge Company in
Gassier's Magazine, Vol. 17, No. 6, (April 1900). p. 25.  On the
page opposite the Wrought Iron advertisement, the Berlin Iron
                                                The Sprague Bridge
                                                HAER No. WI-57
                                                (Page 21 )


Bridge Company prominently advertised only     "Steel Bridges and
Buildings"
28.Waddell, Bridge Engineering, Chapter IV, "Alloy Steels";
Economics of Bridqework; A Sequel to Bridge Engineering, New York,
1921, Chapter V, "Economics of Alloy Steel".
29.Leslie Aitchison, Engineering Steels, New York, 1921, p. vii;
W.E. Dalby Strength and Structure of Steel and Other Metals,
London, 1923, Relies on three sophisticated laboratory instruments
designed and developed by the author. A brief overview of 2 0th
century structural steels is in Edwin H. Gaylord and Charles N.
Gaylord, Design of Steel Structures, New York, 1957, pp. 43-46.
30.Although the Biennial Reports were not sophisticated in their
engineering discussions, they did highlight new techniques and
designs. The lack of any mention of metallurgy in the Biennial
Reports is taken as a measure of a lack of priority.
31.Hans Nelson Brue, "The Development of Highway Bridges In
Wisconsin," Bachelors Thesis in Civil Engineering, University of
Wisconsin, 1916, pp.4-5. The historical record is sketchy here,
and there is no reliable census of bridges by type for this period.
The 1880*s and 1890*s saw a large number of metal trusses built,
often with some controversy of the higher first cost when compared
to the familiar old wooden bridge. It was not just a Phenomenon
of the late 19th century. Simple wood beam, beam-and -pier, and
truss bridges were recommended for the cost-conscious land owner
in Frederick S. Langa' s, "Bridge Your Way to a Low Cost Lot",
Rodale's New Shelter, April 1981, pp.66-75.
32. Diane Kromm, "Milford Bridge," Historic American Engineering
Record Report, unpublished, 1987, HAER No. WI-21.
33.Oconomowoc City Clerk Records, 1871, City Engineer■s Office,
unprocessed collection, Archives Division, SHSW; Kromm, "Milford
Bridge," pp.2-4.
34.T. Allan Comp and Donald Jackson, "Bridge Truss Types: A Guide
to Dating and Identifying," American Association for State and
Local History, Technical Leaflet 95, History News, 32 (May 1977);
Working Files, HBAC.
35.Comp and Jackson, "Bridge Truss Types."
36.James A.L. Waddell, Economics of Bridge Work; A Sequel to Bridge
Engineering, New York, 1921, pp. 73-74; Boiler, Practical Treatise
on the Construction of Iron Highway Bridges, pp. 44-49; "Discussion
                                                 The Sprague Bridge
                                                 HAER No. WI-57
                                                 (Page 22 )


of American Railroad Bridges," American Society of Civil Engineers,
Transactions 2 6 (No. 42 9, December 1889) , p. 593. According to
Boiler (p. 47), "Whatever objection has been urged against shop-
riveting is intensified in a high degree when the field-riveter
steps in to do his part of the work."
37.Waddell, Economics of Bridgework, p. 7; "The Development of
Bridge Trusses," Engineering Record, 42 (November 3, 1900) p. 411.
38.Fowler, "Some American Bridge Shop Methods, Machinery in Bridge
Erection," Cassier's Magazine, 17 (January, February 1900), pp.200-
215, 327-344; "Pneumatic Percussion Riveters," Engineering News 38
(March 3, 1898) pp. 148-9; "Field Riveting by Power," Engineering
News, 42 (October 27, 1900) p. 385; "Pneumatic Field Riveting in
Railway Bridgework," Engineering News, 42 (October 27,1900) pp.
393-4.
39.Waddell, Economics of Bridgework. p. 74; "Development of Bridge
Trusses," p. 411.
40.See, for example, the photograph of "a riveted steel (Pratt pony
truss) highway bridge 401 span... built under supervision of the
Highway Division" in Arthur H. Hirst and M.W. Torkelson, Culverts
and Bridges (Madison, Highway Division, Wisconsin Geological and
Natural History Survey, Road Pamphlet No. 4, second edition, 1908),
p. 43. The SHC standard plan (dated 1908) for a riveted Warren
pony truss with a 40 foot span is found in Microfilm reel M-l,
"Miscellaneous Standards," Bridge Section, Wisconsin Department of
Transportation -
41.A.R. Hirst, "Bridges and Culverts for County Roads," Engineering
News (October 9, 1913, p. 729.    With minor modifications, these
standards are reiterated in Wisconsin Highway Commission, Second
Biennial Report, p. 24.
4 2.U.S.   Department   of   Transportation,    Federal   Highway
Administration, "Design and Construction of Welded Bridge Members
and Connections," Washington D.C., 1980, pp. 1, 6-9.
43.Ballard Campbell, "The Good Roads Movement in Wisconsin, 1890-
1911," Wisconsin Magazine of History, No. 49 (summer 1966), pp.
273-93; M.C. Davis, A History of Wisconsin Highway Development,
1825-1945 (Madison, 1947), pp.218-22; Wisconsin Statutes, Second
Session of the Legislature, January 10. 1849 (Southport, 1849),
pp.182-83; Town Laws of Wisconsin, 1851, p.157; Legislature of
Wisconsin, Private and Local JbatttiLu 1867, pp. 60-61, 179-82; Laws
Of Wisconsin, 1881. Chapter 315, pp. 407-08; Laws of Wisconsin,
1885; Chapter 187, pp. 162-64. Richard N. Current, The History of
                                                 The Sprague Bridge
                                                 HAER No. WI-57
                                                 (Page 23 )


Wisconsin, Vol. II, The Civil War Era. 1848-1873, (Madison, 1976),
p. 28; Robert Nesbit, Wisconsin, A History (Madison, 1973), p. 197.
A sampling of available County Board records suggest that county-
aid bridge projects were infrequent during the 1880 fs, and numbered
five to ten per county, per year during the 1890's.
44.Campbell, "Good Roads," pp. 278-79; Laws of Wisconsin.       1907
(Madison, 1907), Chapter 552, p. 292.
45.Campbell, "Good Roads," pp. 279-84; Davis, Wisconsin Highway
Development, p. 104.
46.State Highway Commission, Second Biennial Report, July 1F 1911
to January 1, 1915 (Madison, 1915), p. 24.
47.A review of Wisconsin Department of Transportation records,
Bridge Section, Microfilm reel M-l.
48.Davis, Wisconsin Highway Development, pp. 112-13; SHC Second
Biennial Report, pp. 21, 14, 30; see also SHC, Preliminary Biennial
Report. July 1. 1911 to January 1, 1913 (Madison, 1913), p. 17.
49.The SHC succinctly assessed the pros and cons of steel truss
and concrete bridges in its Sixth Biennial Report, 1925-1926
(Madison, 1926) , p. 67.    From 1911 to 1915, truss bridges in
Wisconsin cost considerably less per foot than concrete structures.
After 1915, steel began its "great advance in price." See SHC,
Fourth Biennial Report. 1916-1918 (Madison, 1918), pp. 11-12; see
also the comparative cost chart in Engineering News, no. 4 7
(February 28, 1917).
50.A brief biography of these men can be found in Robert S.
Newbery, Jeffery A. Hess, and Robert F. Frame, III, Truss Bridges;
Vol.   II, Historic Highway Bridges of Wisconsin, Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, (Madison, Forthcoming 1988).
                                                The Sprague Bridge
                                                HAER No. WI-57
                                                (Page 24 )



Photocopy of historic photograph. View of bridge deck shortly after
construction, looking east. From the photographic album of W. E.
Gifford Sr. Photographer unknown (original print in possession of
Robert Newbery, Historian, Wisconsin Department of Transportation,
Madison Wisconsin) .
