HAGERSTOWN ROAD BRIDGE                                        HAER No. MD-89
Spanning Little Gatoctin Creek at Old Hagerstown Road,
  0.26 mile north of Alternate U.S. 40
Middletown Vicinity
Frederick County                                                       f?D
Maryland                                                                u-niisrotf
                                                                       ex




                                 PHOTOGRAPHS

                    WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                     HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                             National Park Service
                                Northeast Region
                               U.S. Custom House
                              200 Chestnut Street
                            Philadelphia, PA 19106
                                                                          H^Elfe.

                            HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD

                                   HAGERSTOWN ROAD BRIDGE               HAER No. MD-89



    Location:                       Spanning Little Catoctin Creek at Old Hagerstown Road,
                                     0.26 miles north of Alternate U.S. 40,
                                     Middletown vicinity, Frederick County, Maryland

                                     USGS: Middletown quadrangle
                                     UTM Coordinates: 18 279680 4370040

    Engineer/Architect/
      Builder/Fabricator:            Attributed to the York Bridge Company, York,
                                     Pennsylvania

    Date of Construction:            1920

    Present Owner:                   The Board of County Commissioners of Frederick
                                     County, Maryland
                                     Frederick County Courthouse
                                     Frederick, Maryland 21701

    Present Use:                     vehicular bridge

    Significance:                   The Hagerstown Road Bridge is one of 26 metal
                                    truss bridges remaining in Frederick County. In
•
                                    1978, there were approximately 40, but increased
                                    traffic has led to removal of many bridges. The
                                    bridge is structurally unusual for its low
                                    placement of the lower chord bolt connection.
                                    It is otherwise typical of 1920 steel pony truss
                                    bridge construction of the Pratt type. The road
                                    and crossing are significant as the main 18th
                                    century road west from Frederick to Hagerstown,
                                    until replaced by the National Pike in the early
                                    19th century.

    Project Information:            This documentation was undertaken in April, 1993
                                    in accordance with a Memorandum of Agreement
                                    among the Advisory Council on Historic
                                    Preservation, the Maryland State Historic
                                    Preservation Officer and the Army Corps of
                                    Engineers, as a mitigative measure prior to the
                                    replacement of the bridge. The steel truss
                                    bridge will be relocated to a golf course on the
                                    east side of Middletown.

                                                        Paula S. Reed, PhD
                                                        Architectural Historian
                                                        Preservation Associates, Inc.
                                                        19942 Lehmans Mill Road
                                                        Hagerstown, MD 21742
                                                      HAGERSTOWN ROAD BRIDGE
                                                      HAER No. MD-89 (Page 2


Setting

      The Hagerstown Road Bridge is a steel pony truss structure of Pratt
design crossing Little Catoctin Creek, about one mile northwest of Middletown
in Frederick County, Maryland. It is situated on a curving section of road in
a cluster of 18th and 19th century houses. Just upstream from the bridge are
remnants of a low stone wall. Eighteenth and early 19th century maps show a
mill at this site.


Bridge Description

      The bridge is a five bay Pratt steel pony truss structure with stone
abutments parged with concrete. The bridge has a single span 68 feet, 10
inches long. The truss system is five bays in length with each bay being 13
feet, 8 inches wide and 8 feet, 6 inches high. The deck is 13 feet, 3 inches
wide and consists of wooden planks, 3 inches thick by 9h inches wide. The
bridge deck is supported by six large steel transverse beams, 1 foot, 4%
inches wide. Resting on the transverse beams are eight 8-inch steel beams
spanning the creek, north to south. Three by 8-inch nailers are adjacent to
these beams to which are attached the deck planks.

      Between the vertical members of the truss are diagonal rods or webbing
lh inches in diameter. They cross to form an X in the center bay. Single
diagonal rods are attached on either side of the central bay. The upper chord
is made of four pieces of steel bolted together to form a hollow squared
piece. The vertical supports are attached on either side of the upper chords
and infilled with flat webbing. A horizontal band of crossed webbing forms a
rail across each truss.

      On either side of the span are stone abutments and wing walls. They
have been covered with a thin coat of concrete. They extend approximately 22
feet outward from the bridge and are about 20 inches wide.

      According to Frederick County Roads Department records, the bridge had
wooden stringers in 1942 which were replaced with steel I beams in 1945. In
1975, seven 8-inch beams were replaced and new flooring and nailers were
installed.

      Due to increasing traffic, this bridge is scheduled for replacement.
The Hagerstown Road Bridge is to be moved to a privately developed golf course
just off Alternate U.S. 40, east of Middletown.


Historical Background

      Construction of the Hagerstown Road Bridge is attributed to the York
Bridge Company of York, Pennsylvania, because the structure appears similar to
others built by that company. There is no identification plague on the
bridge. However, both the Maryland Historical Trust State Historic Sites
                                                       HAGERSTOWN ROAD BRIDGE
                                                       HAER No. MD-89 (Page 3\


Survey form and the Frederick County Engineering Department's inspection
records list the date of construction as 1920. It is among the later steel
truss bridges in the county and follows the Pratt design, one of the more
common bridge truss types. The Hagerstown Road Bridge is one of 26 steel
truss bridges remaining in Frederick County, a number which has decreased from
40 since 1978.

      The Old Hagerstown Road has been known by that name at least since 1858
when it was identified by that name on Isaac Bond's Hap of Frederick County.
This road was probably known as "old" after the system of turnpikes was
developed in the early 19th century that eventually became the National Pike
and later Alternate U.S. 40. Dennis Griffith's Map of the State of Maryland,
1794, shows the Old Hagerstown Road as the only route from Frederick to
Hagerstown and points west. However, when Charles Varle's Map of Frederick
and Washington Counties was published in 1808, the main stage road from
Baltimore west through Frederick to Hagerstown followed the present route of
Alternate U.S. 40 causing the earlier route to become the "Old" Hagerstown
Road.

      The creek now known as Little Catoctin was labeled Mill Creek on the
1808 map. One of the three grist or merchant mills located along its length
was located just east of the crossing, identified as "Sweringen's." All that
can be seen of the mill's site are the remains of a stone wall on the south
side of the creek just east of the bridge. The crossing has characteristics
of a typical mill village with a cluster of houses dating from the late 18th
through the mid 19th centuries. Along the road as it leads northwestward from
Middletown toward Hagerstown are other farmsteads which appear to date from
the 18th century attesting to the early development of this route.

      Just prior to the Battle of South Mountain which occurred on September
14, 1862, the U.S. Army's First Corps under General Hooker may have occupied
this road, or nearby Tabor Road as they advanced on South Mountain. According
to Dennis Frye, Chief Historian at Harpers Ferry National Park, Civil War
historians still debate which of the two roads were used by General Hooker's
army. Since his command contained about 12,000 men, perhaps both were used.

      The present bridge, constructed in 1920, apparently replaced an earlier
bridge of unknown design.

      A search was undertaken for historic photographs of this bridge through
consultation with the following sources: the Frederick County Historic Sites
Survey Consultant; local historians with the Frederick County Library's local
history section; published postcard albums and photographic histories of the
county; and historic sites survey documentation. The Frederick County
Department of Public Works' file on this bridge contains photographs as early
as the 1960s. No earlier photographs have been located.
                                                        HAGERSTOWN ROAD BRIDGE
                                                        HAER No. MD-89 (Page 4;


Bibliography

Bond, Isaac.   Map of Frederick County, Maryland.   Baltimore, Maryland, 1858.

Frederick County Department of Public Works, bridge inspection records.

Frye, Dennis E. Chief Historian, Harpers Ferry National Park.     Interview,
        April 26, 1993.

Griffith, Dennis. Map of the State of Maryland. 1794, published in Atlas of
        Historical Maps of Maryland,1608-1908. Edward C. Papenfuse and
        Joseph M. Coale, III, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
        1982.

Varle, Charles. A Map of Frederick and Washington Counties, 1808, published
        in Atlas of Historical Maps of Maryland, 1608-1908. Edward C.
        Papenfuse and Joseph M. Coale, III, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
        University Press, 1982.

Widell, Cherilyn. "Old Hagerstown Road Bridge," inventory form for State
        Historic Sites Survey, Maryland Historical Trust, c. 1978.

Photocopy of drawing of plan and elevation by Kennedy, Bode & Porter, Inc.,
        1981 (photocopy from Frederick County Department of Public Works files)
