RED BRIDGE                                                    HAER No. DE-30
(State Bridge Wo. 809)
Spanning Broadkill River on                                            ■   'f   V"- —^


   Union Street (SR5), 0.9
   miles south of the intersection
                                                                             j      i,4--   \
   of State Road 16 and State Road 5                                       ^,J

Milton
Sussex County
Delaware




                                 PHOTOGRAPHS

                    WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                     HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                             National Park Service
                                Northeast Region
                               U.S. Custom House
                              200 Chestnut Street
                            Philadelphia, PA 19106
                                                                 DEL

                HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                                                  a-
                        RED BRIDGE                     HAER No. DE-3 0
                        (State Bridge No. 809)

Location:        Spanning the Broadkill River on Union Street (SR
                 5), 0.9 miles south of the intersection of State
                 Road 16 and State Road 5. Located in Milton, Sussex
                 County, Delaware.

                USGA Quad: Milton, Del.
                UTM 18.530804.2834370

Date of
Construction:    1916

Present Owner: Delaware Department of Transportation

Present Use:    Riverine crossing for vehicles and pedestrians
Significance:   The bridge is located in the Milton Historic
                District. Although one elevation has been
                altered, the structure in its entirety appears
                to be in character with its surrounding
                environment and is a contributing element in
                the historic district.
Project
Information:    This document was undertaken in June, 1991 in
                accordance with the Memorandum of Agreement by
                the Federal Highway Administration as a
                mitigative measure prior to replacement of the
                bridge.




                                    Michael C. Hahn
                                    Environmental Planner
                                    Location & Environmental Studies
                                    Department of Transportation
                                    Dover, DE 19003
                                   RED BRIDGE (State Bridge No. 809)
                                   HAER No. DE-30   (Page 2)
     Constructed as a riverine crossing elimination, the Red Bridge
carries Union Street (SR 5) over the Broadkill River. This single
span, highly embellished example of a concrete encased steel girder
and concrete slab bridge is significant because of its locational
history and architectural treatment.
     Delaware Department of Transportation records state that the
Red Bridge was originally built in 1916 by authority of the Sussex
County Levy Court, under Contract CS 21.     Morgan T. Gum was the
county engineer and Alfred H. Megee the road commissioner.        A
plaque on the bridge parapet contains this information. The bridge
was constructed as part of a project to build a road between Milton
and the village of Harbeson. Original plan drawings do not exist.
Drawings on file at the Delaware Department of Transportation
document the most current details of design, materials, and
construction for this structure.     These drawings, approved and
dated September 21, 1951 indicate that the bridge was reconstructed
and designed under Delaware State Highway Department Contract
Number 7 69.   The drawings for the structure note that it was
designed in accordance with American Association of Highway
Officials (AASHO) specifications of 1949 for a H-15 loading (AASHO
was the predecessor to today's AASHTO).

     Work under Contract 769 in 1951 included widening and
replacement to the downstream railing.  The railing was replaced
with a concrete parapet which reflects the shape of the original
metal railing.
     The present appearance of the bridge shows signs of structural
deterioration. The entire substructure displays evidence of severe
deterioration.

      Red Bridge, better known as State Highway Bridge Number 809,
is a concrete encased steel girder bridge located in the Milton
Historic District.   The single span bridge is 24'-7" long and is
34'-0" wide carrying two lanes of traffic and a sidewalk on each
side.    The superstructure consists of concrete abutments and
straight, rubble wing walls.   The bridge has been widened on the
downstream elevation, but its original configuration is evident on
the upstream, where the original stone parapet and metal lattice
railing remain.

     As it was originally constructed in 1916, the Red Bridge
represents one of the earliest structures of its type surveyed in
Delaware. It predates the creation of the Delaware State Highway
Department, and exemplifies the road construction and improvement
activities undertaken by the Sussex County Levy Court in the period
before state and federal assistance became available in significant
amounts for these purposes.
                                   RED BRIDGE (State Bridge No. 809)
                                   HAER No. DE-30 (Page 3)
     During this period, county road and bridge construction was
financed by local real estate taxes; especially in rural areas,
where property values were lower than in the cities and suburbs,
this funding proved insufficient to maintain the roads as motor
traffic steadily increased. By 1917, rural Sussex County had only
managed to underwrite 35 miles of macadam-surfaced roads.      The
construction of Red Bridge during this period, as part of a road
building project which encompassed approximately four miles,
represented a significant undertaking for the county at this time.
     The passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act in 1916 set in
motion a series of changes which would greatly accelerate the pace
of road improvement in Delaware. The Act provided Federal Matching
funds to states for road construction up to 50% of cost or $10,000
per mile, and required that states set up an authoritative highway
department with a professional staff.    In response, the General
Assembly passed the Highway Act of 1917, creating the Delaware
State Highway Department.
     The road building program was further stimulated in 1919, when
the State Aid Road Law enabled counties to issue bonds to match
state funds.    The 1919 law enabled each of Delaware's three
counties to receive $250,000 annually in matching funds for road
and bridge construction. Sussex County was to take full advantage
of this program, accepting $250,000, matched with a bond issue, to
construct 58 miles of road.
     The Red Bridge thus represents the construction activities of
the Sussex County Levy Court in the period before significant
financial assistance became available.
      The Red Bridge is an example of an embellished concrete
bridge; most concrete bridges surveyed in Delaware are single spans
with little ornamentation. Steel girder and concrete slab bridges,
like the small Delaware bridges inventoried, have been widely built
in the U.S. for highway use throughout the twentieth century. As
a class, these commonly built bridge types represent an economical
and expedient engineering solution which found broad application
across the nation.    Generally, their treatment was handled in a
formulaic manner, presenting a standardized and uninspired
impression, rather than an aesthetic statement.      Embellishment,
when presented at all, was limited to simple geometric designs
breaking up the visual mass of the solid concrete parapets. The
ubiquitousness of steel girder and concrete slab bridges, and their
noninnovative technological and aesthetic character, prompted
engineering historian Carl Condit to observe the great number of
these "commonplace structures" with "design and appearance so
nearly uniform" made it difficult to select noteworthy examples.
                                   RED BRIDGE (State Bridge No. 809)
                                   HAER No. DE-3 0 (Page 4)
     The results of the historic bridge survey in Delaware
confirm the widely built numbers of simple, small spans.     This
commonly built type exemplifies the continuing expansion and
improvement of the road network under the auspices of the Delaware
State Highway Department.
     As mentioned, the Red Bridge is located in the Milton Historic
District, which is significant for its early associations with
navigation on the Broadkill River and is characterized by buildings
reflecting a variety of architectural styles representing periods
from the mid-nineteenth through early twentieth centuries.
                                 RED BRIDGE (State Bridge No. 809)
                                 HAER No. DE-30 (Page 5)

              HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD

                          BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mack, Warren W. "A History of Motor Highways in Delaware: in
 Reed, Henry Clay, Delaware A History of the First State,
 Vol. 2, pp. 535-550 (NY: Lewis Historical Publishing Com.,
 1947) .

Delaware State Program. Delaware State Highways: The Story of
 Roads in Delaware (Wilmington, Del.: 1919)

Federal Writers' Project. Delaware: A Guide to the First
 State. (New York: Viking Press, 1938).

Carter, Dick. The History of Sussex County. Georgetown, Del.:
 Community Newspaper Corp., 1976.
Plans on file at Delaware DOT: Contract #769
                            RED BRIDGE {STATE BRIDGE NO. 809)

                            HAER NO. DE-30 (PAGE^f



    RED BRIDGE
  e/a BUILT 1916 6V9
SUSSEX COUNTY LEVYCGUftf*
MORGAN T GUM, EN6£«
ALFRED H. ME6E£,C0MM.




  Sca/e: f'30'
ADDENDUM TO:                                                             HAER DE-30
RED BRIDGE                                                          HAER DEL,3-MILT,2-
(State Bridge No. 809)
Spanning Broadkill River at Union Street (State Road No. 5)
Milton
Sussex County
Delaware




                                          FIELD RECORDS




                           HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                      National Park Service
                                  U.S. Department of the Interior
                                        1849 C Street NW
                                   Washington, DC 20240-0001
