    Cunningham I^ne Bridge                                HAER No. WI-51
    Guraiingham Lane over Pine; River
    Rockbridge Township
*   Richland County
    Wisconsin




                              PHOTOGRAPHS

                WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                 Historic American Engineering Record
                         National Park Service
                    Rocky Mountain Regional Office
                      Department of the Interior
                             P.O. Box 25287
                        Denver, Colorado 80225
                                                              HH£R
                 HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                                              Si-
                        CUNNINGHAM LANE BRIDGE

                             HAER No. WI-51




Location:              Spanning the Pine River, .2 miles east of
                       State Highway 80 in the town of Rockbridge,
                       Richland County, Wisconsin.

                       UTM: 15.713390.4813000
                       Quad: Rockbridge

Date of Construction: 1895

Bridge Manufacturer:   The Chicago Bridge and Iron Company

Present Owner:         The Town of Rockbridge

Present Use:           Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic
Significance:          The Cunningham Lane Bridge, a Pratt full-
                       slope pony truss, is one of the earliest
                       remaining Pratt trusses in Wisconsin. Built
                       by the Chicago Bridge and Iron Company, a
                       significant regional bridge fabricator, the
                       small truss is indicative of the period's
                       bridge designs and construction ideology.




Historian:             Edwin G. Cordes
                       March 1988
                       Prepared for Westbrook Associated Engineers
                       Inc., Plain, WI. for the Wisconsin
                       Department of Transportation Project ID
                       5366-02-00, Cunningham Lane Bridge, Richland
                       County. Federal Highway Administration
                       Project BRZ 5299(22).
                                                 Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                             HAER No. WI-51     page 2




    The Cunningham Lane bridge, a small Pratt full-slope pony truss
maintains access to two small farms south-east of the town of
Rockbridge in Richland County, Wisconsin. The bridge spans the Pine
River approximately .2 miles east of State Highway 80. The truss
bridge is located in an area rich with glacier geology and
sandstone formations. Designed and fabricated by the Chicago Bridge
and Iron Company, and erected on the site in 1895, the Cunningham
Lane Bridge is one of Wisconsin's oldest remaining examples of a
Pratt design bridge. Records list 317 existing Pratt trusses while
only 69 are full slope Pratt pony truss bridges and only two of the
pony trusses are older than the Cunningham Lane span.l
    The small, three panel pony truss has an overall length of 41
feet 3 inches, a width of 12 feet 11 inches, and a deck height of 6
feet, 3 inches. Two small bridge plates which identified the
fabricator as "Chicago Bridge Company - 1895" were mounted on the
batter braces and have since been removed. The deck is composed of
commercially sawn lumber of uneven lengths and supported by 5 large
wooden joists. The wooden joists are in turn supported by iron I-
beam lateral struts which are connected to the bottom chord members
and hipped verticals. Lower lateral rods give the bridge deck
further diagonal stability.
                                                 Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                             HAER No. WI-51     page 3

    The bridge rests on simple expansion bearings which are mounted
to recently constructed cylindrical concrete footings encased in
steel forms. Wood retaining walls help retard erosion from the pier
areas.
    All major truss connections are of pin design. The batter
braces and top chords are of a common design, with two channels
connected by a cover plate on the top side and lattice work on the
underside. The bottom chord is composed of dual eye bars, which may
be wrought iron.2
    The verticals and diagonals show unusual details. The verticals
are composed of two offset, opposing angle irons joined at
intervals with riveted plates. This design provides for increased
section while facilitating ease of fabrication and erection. The
member itself would be easy to layout, punch, and rivet in the
shop, while the open spaces between the angles would facilitate
connection of the lateral knee braces in the field. The double row
of rivets reduces the section somewhat but also reduces the shear
stress on each rivet.
    The diagonals have looped welded connections at the top and
bottom chords. Towards the bottom chord end of each diagonal is an
open turnbuckle, which is connected to threaded ends of the
diagonal. The threaded ends are round and upset. An unusual feature
of these diagonals is their bottom and top chord connections which
are of a forged double loop construction. The double loop
connection forms a slot into which the hipped verticals fit. The
complex termination allows the diagonal tension members to remain
centered at the pin joints.
                                                 Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                             HAER No. WI-51     page 4

    These details appear to be a standard feature of the Chicago
Bridge and Iron Company's designs during this period. The Bills
Street Bridge in the town of Augusta, Eau Claire County, Wisconsin
is a 102 foot long Pratt through truss also designed by the Chicago
Bridge Company in 1894.3 The Augusta bridge also contains the
unique split looped eye bar connections and dual riveted angle
irons are used to create the hipped vertical members. It is quite
possible that these unique engineering aspects served as a
trademark of the Chicago Bridge and Iron Company's design.


    The Pratt truss bridge design was patented by Thomas and Caleb
Pratt in 1844.4 The design is characterized by diagonal members
acting in tension and vertical members in compression. This design
allowed for reduced length in the compression members, not only
saving materials but also adding to the strength of the structure.
After the diagonal members were reduced to one per panel, the
configuration began to gain acceptance as an alternative to the
complex and costly Whipple, Bollman and Fink systems.5 When an all
iron version of the Pratt truss was introduced in the 1870's, the
design's use became widespread. The durability, versatility and
economy of structure quickly caused it to become the single most
common of all truss designs, rivaled only by the Warren
configuration.6
    Although originally constructed of both timber and cast iron,
the Pratt truss was easily adapted to all wrought iron and later
steel construction.7 The simplicity of the bridge design allowed
for standardization and adaptability for many different sizes and
                                                 Cunningham Lane Bridge
                '                            HAER No. WI-51     page 5

uses. Many later truss designs employed the basic Pratt
configuration with minor changes. An example would be the Parker
truss which is actually a Pratt with a polygonal top chord. The
simplistic design allowed for prefabricated pieces and site
construction by unskilled workers.


    The Chicago Bridge and Iron Company was one in a number of
regional Midwest bridge fabricating firms founded shortly before
the turn of the century. The company was incorporated in July of
1889 by Horton, Wheelock and King in Chicago.8 Horace E. Horton who
originally was a bridge contractor in Rochester Minnesota proved to
be the central figure in the business venture. Business directories
list the company as active from 1891-1909.9 Horton appears in the
Rochester directories under bridge contractors from 1886-1891.10
Horace Horton eventually became sole owner of the large bridge
fabricating company.


     The board of supervisors of Richland County established the
town of Rockbridge in June of 1850 from land included in the
township of Richmond.11 The town was established to benefit
numerous residents, drawn to the area by the mature timber stands
and abundant rivers for milling. The first settler to Rockbridge,
Samuel Swinehart in 1844, established the mill that would later
serve as the central^p6int of the town.12 As the oak and maple
growths were deforested, immigrants began to utilize the land for
farming. The 1900 U.S. census lists the population of Richland
County at 19,121 and the town of Rockbridge at 991, making
                                                   Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                               HAER No. WI-51     page 6

it the fifth largest town in the county.13 Settlers were primarily
of northern European descent and came from areas such as Rockford
111., Waukesha Wi., and Washington County, Wi.. Judge James H.
Minerfs Richland County History lists two people, Budington Kinyon
and Alden Haseltine as probable early settlers near the present
bridge site.14
    No direct reference to the construction of the Cunningham Lane
Bridge can be found in the    1894 or 1895 proceedings of the
Richland County Board of Supervisors, although I.M. Janney, the
Rockbridge representative, headed the Committee on Roads and
Bridges and was authorized to construct or make repairs to bridges
as needed by the chairman D.L. Noble at those sessions,15


    The Cunningham Lane Bridge is significant in its representation
of a common bridge design of the period. It is an example of a
design adaptable to many lengths and sites and is an indication of
the growing movement towards standardization, economy and utility
in early highway construction. The span's age and the interesting
design features found in Chicago Bridge and Iron Company structures
give it added significance.
                                             iM. Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                             HAER No. WI-51     page 7



                                Endnotes

1   Barbara Wyatt, Proj. Dir. Cultural Resource Management in
Wisconsin, Vol. 2. A Manual for Historic Properties, (Madison:
Historic Preservation Division, State Historical Society of
Wisconsin, 1986) p.12-6.

2   By 1895, the rolled compression members of almost all truss
bridges were probably steel. The tension members such as eye bars,
may have been wrought iron. See Robert S. Newbery, Truss Bridges,
Vol. 4., Historic Highway Bridges of Wisconsin, (Madison: Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, 1988).

3   George M. Danko, A Selective Survey of Truss Bridges, (Madison:
The State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Historic Preservation
Division, 1977) p.39.

4   T. Allan Comp, "Bridge Truss Types: A Guide to, Identifying and
Dating". Technical Leaflet 95. (Nashville, TN.: American
Association for State and Local History, 1977).

5   David Plowden, Bridges: The Spans of North America (New York:
Viking Press, 1974) pp. 64-65.
6    "Truss Types".

7    Bridges, p. 65.

8   Eli W. Imberman, "The Formative Years of the Chicago Bridge and
Iron Company". Vols. 1 and 2, Ph.D dissertation (The University of
Chicago, 1973) p. 264.

9    Selective Survey, p. 51.
10
    Ibid. Horace E. Horton may be related to Charles M. Horton, the
founder of a bridge building company under his name during this
period in La Crosse, WI. See report HAER No. WI-22, McGilvary Road
Bridges No. 1-4,6. Diane Kromm, Summer 1987.

11 James H. Miner, The History of Richland County Wisconsin.
(Madison: Western Historical Association, 1906) p. 279.

12   Ibid, p. 280.

13   Ibid, p. 190.

14   Ibid, p. 283.
15 Proceedings of The Board of Supervisors, Richland County
Wisconsin, Annual Session, Nov. - Dec. 1894, 1895 (Viola WI.:
The Intelligencer Print, 1895).
                                                 Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                             HAER No. WI-51     page 8

                            Bibliography


Comp, T. Allan. "Bridge Truss Types: A Guide to, Identifying and
    Dating". Technical Leaflet 95, Nashville, TN.: American
    Association for State and Local History, 1977.
Danko, George M. A Selective Survey of Truss Bridges. Madison:
    The State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Historic
    Preservation Division, 1977.
Imberman, Eli W. "The Formative Years of the Chicago Bridge and
    Iron Company". Vols. 1 and 2, Ph.D dissertation.
    University of Chicago, 1973.
Miner, James H. The History of Richland County Wisconsin. Madison
    Wisconsin: Western Historical Association, 1906.
Newbery, Robert S. Truss Bridges, Vol. 4. Historic Highway Bridges
    of Wisconsin. Madison Wisconsin: Wisconsin Department of
    Transportation, 1988.
Plowden, David. Bridges: The Spans of North America. New York:
    Viking Press, 1974.
Wyatt, Barbara. Proj. Dir. Cultural Resource Management in
    Wisconsin, Vol. 2. A Manual for Historic Properties.
    Madison: Historic Preservation Division, State Historical
    Society of Wisconsin, 1986.


Proceedings of The Board of Supervisors, Richland County
    Wisconsin. Annual Session Nov. - Dec, 1894, 1895, Viola WI.:
    The Intelligencer Print, 1895.
                                                 Cunningham Lane Bridge
                                             HAER No. WI-51     page 9




                                   /
                                                                O



                at                     3P                   n
                                                                If!1")'
                                                                /<-■




                                                    :=£. (%
                                                    f> ,
                                                    (fiji       (TO
                                                   p;
                                                    O           f;>
                                                                -UL



                                                                31



     "^rnp

                              ro
                                                    3 1
                      Df O ©
                      ® < <             o
m                     —    a?           to
a.                   <D
                     ^r                                         ft
o                         0 $$
o
~i


0)
                                                                m
8                     I   t   i

                     C
                      ^ ^ &5                                    CO
^4                                                              as
     .Liiuii:
