                                                                           NABR
                                                                           DEL

                                                                       3~
STATE BRIDGE NO. 177                                      HAER No. DE-51
Brackenville Road, Spanning Mill Creek
Hockessin Vicinity
New Castle County
Delaware




                            PHOTOGRAPHS

               WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                   HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                         National Park Service
                       Philadelphia Support office
                           U.S. Custom House
                          200 Chestnut Street
                        Philadelphia, PA 19106
                                                                                    DEL


                    HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                                                                   3-
                            STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                               HAERNO. DE-51


    LOCATION:                 Brackenville Road, spanning Mill Creek, Hockessin
                              vicinity, New Castle County, Delaware.

                              USGS Kennett Square, PA-DE Quadrangle,
                              UTM Coordinates: 18.440900.4403050

    DATE OF CONSTRUCTION:     1846

    BUILDER:                  New Castle County

    PRESENT OWNER:            Delaware Department of Transportation

    PRESENT USE:              Highway bridge

    SIGNIFICANCE:             Bridge No. 177 is a representative example of a stone
                              single-arch wagon bridge, typical of mid-nineteenth-century
                              bridges built with local labor and materials along roads in
                              New Castle County and other areas of the Mid-Atlantic
                              region.

    PROJECT INFORMATION:      A July 1996 evaluation of Bridge No. 177 resulted in a
                              recommendation of immediate repairs. This recordation
                              project was undertaken pursuant to an agreement between
                              DelDOT and the Delaware State Historic Preservation
                              Office. Bridge No. 177 was recorded in July 1996 by the
                              Cultural Resource Group of Louis Berger & Associates,
                              Inc., East Orange, New Jersey, for DelDOT. Photography
                              was performed by David C. Berg, Architectural Historian.
                              Research was conducted by Philip E. Pendleton,
                              Architectural Historian.




r
                                                                   STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                                   HAER No. DE-51 (Page 2)
DESCRIPTION

State Bridge No. 177 is a stone arch bridge constructed as a single-arch span carrying
Brackenville Road over Mill Creek. The bridge's setting is that of an area that still retains some
rural character, a sense reinforced by the presence of the woods lining Mill Creek and by the
relatively narrow width of Brackenville Road itself, though, in fact, the area has undergone
steady and very extensive exurban residential development since World War II. The upper
stonework (i.e., the parapet) was removed in 1965, but the remainder of the original bridge
survives intact beneath a broader concrete deck. Regarding its orientation, the stone bridge is
built in the more commonly employed "right" or straight form to carry the road directly over
the stream. The bridge is aligned running from southwest to northeast. The arch is segmental
in design, and spans twenty feet. The original stone-built structure is twenty-one feet broad at
the spandrels, the slightly broader wing wall sections being of U-shaped configuration. Apart
from the relatively large, squared voussoir stones that form the arch, the bridge is composed of
rubble or undressed stones that have been laid as random rubble. The stone used appears to be
gneiss, probably quarried locally. The random rubble stonework has been fairly heavily parged.
This general reinforcement of the structure was probably carried out at a point relatively early
during the period from 1921, when the unparged structure was photographed, through 1964, the
beginning date for DelDOT's maintenance records for the bridge (P.A.C. Spero & Company
1991:17). (The 1921 photograph has unfortunately been lost or mislaid since its use in a 1991
publication.)

The reinforced concrete slab that was laid over the stone bridge in 1965 is twenty-four feet wide
and carries two lanes of roadway. Galvanized guard rail serves as parapet. The original stone
parapet rose about three feet above the road and was capped by stone coping.

A simple inscription is carved in a relatively large stone lodged in the midpoint of the northwest
spandrel wall, reading:

                                            N. C. C.
                                              1846


HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

State Bridge No. 177 was constructed in 1846 by the New Castle County government as one
instance in an extended series of bridge improvements that transpired between 1820 and 1870.
The stone arch bridge underwent a radical alteration in 1965 when the parapet was removed so
that the bridge could be widened via the overlaying of a concrete slab. Its nature as a stone-arch
structure remained readily observable from the side, however. As of July 1996, the bridge was
slated for removal and replacement with a modern structure.
                                                                         STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                                         HAERNo. DE-51 (Page 3)
      Bridge No. 177 is situated in Mill Creek Hundred, New Castle County, Delaware, spanning Mill
      Creek to carry Brackenville Road. It lies in the northern part of Mill Creek Hundred in a local
      vicinity known as Hockessin. The settlement of this area by the English and the Ulster Scots
      commenced circa 1710-1715, although a very few Swedish or Dutch pioneers may have arrived
      earlier. The land of Hockessin was of above-average fertility, and the area soon became known
      for its agricultural prosperity. Besides good land, the presence of fall line topography and
      numerous substantial streams in Hockessin and neighboring localities provided opportunities for
      the employment of waterpower by gristmills and other hydraulic industrial facilities (Conrad
      1908:478-79; Lake 1976).

      From the mid-eighteenth through the mid-nineteenth century, the confluence in northern
      Delaware of topography, of the larger Delaware Valley region economy's emphasis on the
      production of wheat, and of the marked presence of the Quaker entrepreneurial spirit, resulted
      in the emergence of a unique concentration of the flour milling industry. The mills of the
      Brandywine Valley, in particular, located some 5-10 miles east of Mill Creek, became known
      for the mechanical and architectural innovations that were introduced by Oliver Evans and
      others, but many gristmills and flour mills were also seated along Mill Creek. Farmers from
      a much greater surrounding region in Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware often brought their
      wheat via wagon to northern Delaware if they judged the business opportunity favorable to their
—•    interest. With many coming from the area of Lancaster and western Chester counties in
      Pennsylvania, this created a strong flow of wagons through the Hockessin vicinity in addition
      to the activity of local farmers transporting their wheat crop to mill (Lake 1976).

      Although major road improvements were built through the Hockessin area in the 1810s to speed
      the passage of the Lancaster County-Delaware wagon traffic, Brackenville Road does not
      represent one of these (Lake 1976). The road's early history is not known, but its relatively
      long course, four miles in length from Route 7 to Route 82, suggests that it served as a
      comparatively prominent linking or secondary road for local traffic and is probably a good deal
      older than 1846 when the stone arch bridge was built. It was identified on a circa 1847 draft
      of an intersecting road as the "Public Road to Philip's Mill," the latter establishment being
      seated by Red Clay Creek about two-and-a-half miles northeast of Bridge No. 177 (New Castle
      County Court of General Sessions Road Papers).

      HISTORY OF BRIDGE NO. 177

      The erection of Bridge No. 177 was one in a long series of bridge constructions that took place
      in New Castle County between 1820 and 1870, part of a general national movement for the
      improvement of local transportation facilities (Lake 1976). At the same session of the New
      Castle County Levy Court that decided to proceed with building this bridge, that of March 1846,
      it was resolved that bridge construction expenditures be sharply limited and closely monitored.
      It was considered that the county's taxpayers had borne a heavy fiscal burden over the past two
f~~   decades or so due to the high number of bridges that the county had constructed during that
      period. A petition for the bridge from people residing near its site had been brought to the Levy
                                                                       STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                                       HAERNo. DE-51 (Page 4)
    Court a month earlier, and a committee had been appointed to examine the site and consider the
    matter. In March this committee made a report favoring the construction of "a new bridge in
    Mill Creek Hundred over Mill Creek, near the residence of Job Taylor." The Levy Court
    ordered that $400 be appropriated so that the project could proceed (New Castle County Levy
    Court Minutes). The circa 1847 draft for an intersecting road along the southwest bank of Mill
    Creek showed the stone arch bridge in place, referred to as "Bridge at Taylor's Fording" (New
    County Court of General Sessions Road Papers).

    The stone-arch form was a comparatively common choice made to span smaller crossings in
    Delaware during the nineteenth century, especially in the northernmost county of New Castle
    where building stone was readily available. In the 1920s, some twenty or so stone arch bridges
    remained standing in New Castle County alone. As of 1988, however, only four stone arch
    bridges survived throughout Delaware's three counties (HABS/HAER 1988).

    The most extensive modification or repair made to the bridge between its original construction
    and its major alteration in 1965 was the reconstruction of one of the wing walls in 1925. This
    work, however, preserved the form of the existing bridge (DelDOT Plan Files). The
    construction, done in 1965, in which the stone parapet was removed and a concrete slab poured
    to carry a wider roadway, represented a real modification. Following the initial postwar growth
    burst of the northern Delaware residential suburbs, the alteration of the bridge was undertaken
    in response to a complaint by local residents regarding the unsafe narrow width of the stone-arch
    structure (DelDOT Maintenance Files; DelDOT Plan Files).

    REFERENCES

    Conrad, Henry C.
    1908         History of the State of Delaware.       3 vols.   Henry C. Conrad, Wilmington,
                 Delaware.

    Delaware Department of Transportation [DelDOT]
    various     Maintenance Files. File No. 1-177-274. On file at DelDOT Archives, Dover,
                Delaware.

    various       Plan Files. Contract No. 64-04-014. On file at DelDOT Archives, Dover,
                  Delaware.

    Historic American Buildings Survey/Historic American Engineering Record [HABS/HAER]
    1988         Delaware State Bridge No. 177, HABS/HAER Inventory Form. Prepared by
                 P.A.C. Spero & Company. On file at HABS/HAER, National Park Service,
                 Washington, D.C.

r
                                                                 STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                                 HAERNo. DE-51 (Page 5)
    Lake, Joseph R., Jr.
    1976         Hockessin: A Pictorial History. Hockessin-Yorklyn-Corner Ketch Bicentennial
                 Committee, Hockessin, Delaware.

    New Castle County Records
    various     New Castle County Court of General Sessions. Road Docket and Road Papers.
                 On file at the Delaware State Archives, Dover, Delaware.

    various      New Castle County Levy Court.      Minutes.   On file at the Delaware State
                 Archives, Dover, Delaware.

    P.A.C. Spero & Company
    1991         Delaware Historic Bridges: Survey and Evaluation.  DelDOT Historic
                 Architecture and Engineering Series No. 89. Delaware Department of
                 Transportation, Dover, Delaware.

    Rea, Samuel, and Jacob Price
    1849         Map of New Castle County, Delaware. Smith & Wistar, Philadelphia. On file
                 at the Delaware State Archives, Dover, Delaware.




f
                                          STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                          HAERNo. DE-51 (Page 6)
                                                                           Hote




                                                                       1   MILE




Location Map   SOURCE: USGS 7.5 Minute Quadrangle, Kennett Square, PA-DEL 1993
                                                                                     STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                                                     HAERNo. DE-51 (Page 7)
                        St*;**.


                                         -v.



                                                                                                              v?u*.   •*■




                                       hLfr/woL td
                                                          4'I  t7jdOvv.av. fiktvwoUfc-v-

**«

              1 a r. \ i
              ffw**


               I

       \\




            &*clt


            &*"* Apm.* i>/foil**Miit'*          >\     • " ~
                                                     4' .■>
                                                     /'



                                               4:
 Bridge and Immediate Vicinity, Ca. 1847        SOURCE: New Castle County Records. New Castle County Court of General
                                 Sessions. Road Docket and Road Papers, on file at the Delaware State Archives, Dover, DE.
                                                  STATE BRIDGE NO. 177
                                                  HAERNo. DE-51 (Page 8)
                                                                      LHaihsr




Bridge Vicinity, 1849   SOURCE: Rea and Price, Map of New Castle County, Delaware, 1849.
                                On file at the Delaware State Archives, Dover, DE.
