    Grant Hoad Bridge                                             HAER No. DC-17

w   Spanning Broad Branch Creek, on Grant Road at
      the: intersection with Broad Branch Road, NW
    Roek Creek Park
    Washington
    District of Columbia                                              ^.DC™




                                      PHOTOGRAPHS
                        WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                          Historic American Engineering Record
                                  National Park Service
                               Department of the Interior
                               Washington, DC 20013-7127
                                                                             H
                                                                           PC,
                        HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD

                                 GRANT ROAD BRIDGE
                                                                          b b *3
                                      HAER NO. DC-17




Location:                  On Grant Road at the intersection of Broad Branch Road
                           spanning Broad Branch, Rock Creek Park, Washington D.C.

                           UTM: 18/32800/^33^40
                           Quad: Washington West

Date of Construction;      ca. 1898

Engineer:                  Unknown

Present Owner:             Rock Creek Park
                           National Capital Region
                           National Park Service
                           Department of the Interior

Present Use:              Vehicular bridge

Significance:              Grant Road Bridge is one of the earliest bridges located
                           in Rock Creek Park.    Built during the late nineteenth
                           century, the bridge may have been one of the first built
                           with appropriations for the park.

Historian:                 Maroia H. Miller, 1988
                                                               GRANT ROAD BRIDGE
                                                         HAER No, DC-17 (page 2)



      After years of proposals, Rock Creek Park was created by an Act passed by
Congress on September 27, 1890. Containing appropriations to purchase 1605-9
acres of land running along Rock Creek from the Maryland border to the Zoological
Park to be preserved as a natural park, the act defined the purpose of the park
as providing "for the preservation from injury or spoliation of all timber,
animals, or curiosities within said park, and their retention in their natural
condition as nearly as possible."' At the time, the United States government
had designated only two other such areas as natural parks.     The Commissioners
of the District of Columbia and Chief of Engineers of the United States Army
jointly controlled the park (although at this time the military exercised more
authority). Their duty was to lay out paths and roads for public use. After
purchasing the land, however, Congress did not provide for any improvements to
the park for the next seven years.

      The park remained under the Board of Control of Rock Creek Park until
1918. At this time it became part of the National Park system in the District
of Columbia and the duties were transferred to the jurisdiction of the Office
of Public Buildings and Grounds.      The officer in charge of the park still
reported to the Array Chief of Engineers.    In 1925, the new Office of Public
Buildings and Public Parks of the National Capital administered the Park after
the Office of Public Buildings and Grounds was abolished.         Then, in 1933
President Franklin Roosevelt abolished this office, along with the Rock Creek
and Potomac Parkway Commission (established to complete a parkway along the
lower end of the creek).       The Office of National Parks, Buildings, and
Reservations in the Department of the Interior (a temporary name for the National
Park Service) gained control of the park at this time.      Rock Creek Park thus
became one of the National Capital Parks.

      Since Congress did not appropriate money for work within the park, chain
gangs (comprised of District prisoners) completed the improvements to paths and
roads. In 1898, Congress finally approved funding to create a road running the
length of the park. Beach Drive followed the natural course of the path along
the creek.^ This became, and remains today, the main thoroughfare through the
park. There were, however, several older roads intersecting the park. Grant




      'Mackintosh, Barry. Rock Creek Park An Administrative History. History
Division, National Park Service, Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
1985, p. 17.

     ^ibid. Yellowstone   and   Sequoia National   Parks were   the   first   to be
designated as such.

     ^Beach Drive is named in honor of Col. Lansing H. Beach, Army Corps of
Engineers, U.S.A. who served as Secretary of the Board of Control of Rock Creek
Park and later as the Bridge Commissioner for the District of Columbia. He is
responsible for the early improvements to Rock Creek Park.
                                                                 GRANT ROAD BRIDGE
                                                           HAER No. DC-17 (page 3)


Road runs from Broad Branch Road to Glover Road and crosses Broad Branch.    This
road connected with old Military Road.      The first reference to the present
structure is found in the Commissioners Report of 1898. In this report, George
H. Bailey's, Engineer of Bridges, noted that a "new masonry culvert was built
over Broad Branch at the junction of Broad Branch road and the portion of the
Military road leading southwest toward Tennallytown."-* The same report lists
expenditures of $480,48 for a masonry culvert at the intersection of Broad Branch
and Military Roads.    This would make the bridge one of, if not the earliest
extant bridge built in Rock Creek Park.

      The structure is a stone arch bridge, with a ten foot span and twenty-one
feet wide. The interior of the arch is lined with brick. The stone is partially
granite, a native stone of the creek, as is part of the footings. There is a
keystone located at the center of the arch ring on both sides of the bridge.
The downstream side is more irregular in the placement of the granite compared
to the other stone.

       Repairs are scheduled for 1989 or 1990. Major work will involve rebuilding
a broken and settled wing wall on the west (upstream) side. Repointing of mortar
joints is also planned.

      Unlike later bridges erected in Rock Creek Park, the Grant Road Bridge is
truly a masonry structure. Despite its modest size and appearance this bridge
manages to impart the type of rustic design and appearance which later bridges
in the park could only imitate, utilizing stone facing on more modern structural
systems.




         Glover Road was long known as Ridge Road.   Mackintosh, 1985, p. 22.

     ^Report of the Engineer of Bridges, Washington, DC, located in the Report-
District of Columbia Commissioners, 1897-1898, v. 2, p. 83. According to the
maps in the Washingtoniana Collection of the Martin Luther King, D.C. Public
Library, the portion of Military Road mentioned in the Commissioners Report is
the same as present-day Grant Road. See: "Washington and Suburbs, District of
Columbia Showing Permanent System of Highways" (map 1902w) and "Map of the
District of Columbia Showing Location of Schools" (map 1904d).
     6
      ibid., p. 84.
                                                              GRANT ROAD BRIDGE
                                                        HAER No. DC-17 (page 4)



                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


Mackintosh, Barry. Rock Creek Park An Administrative History. History Division,
      National Fark Service, Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C., 1985.

Myer, Donald Beekman. Bridges and the City of Washington.    U.S. Commission of
      Fine Arts, Washington, D.C., 1974.

Robbins, Mary Caroline.   "Park Making as a National Art."     Atlantic Monthly
      1987.

Tweed, William C, Laura E. Soulliere and Henry G. Law. National Park Service
      Rustic Architecture: 1916-1942. National Park Service Western Regional
      Office Division of Cultural Resource Management. February 1977.

U.S. Department of Transportation. Bridge Safety Inspection Report Grant Road
      Bridge, Rock Creek Park [Bridge # 3450-037P].          Federal Highway
      Administration, Eastern Direct Federal Division.
