First Evangelical Lutheran Church                             HABS No. IA-62
  {Sheldahl Norwegian Lutheran Church)
Two blocks east of County Road R-38
  and one "block north of NW l66
  Avenue
Sheldahl
Story County                                                            HA-K
Iowa




                                                                               I


                                   PHOTOGRAPHS

                      REDUCED COPIES OF MEASURED DRAWINGS

                    WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                      Historic American Buildings Survey
                            National Park Service
                         Department of the Interior
                          Washington, D.C.   202*10
                       HISTORIC AMERICAN BUILDINGS SURVEY                      v/rf

                         FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                      (.SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)              HABS No. IA-62



Location:     Two blocks east of County Road R-38 and one block north of

              NW 166 Avenue in the town of Sheldahl.      Sheldahl lies in

              three counties:   Story, Polk, and Boone.    The church is in

              the town's northeast portion, which lies in Story County.

Present owner:     Anna Sheldahl

Present use:       The building remains a church, but is used very seldom.

Significance:      The building is an excellent example of a frugal and

                   simple church built by an Immigrant Norwegian pastor,

                   Osmund Sheldahl, for his flock.     It survives virtually

._                 ^ ^tg original condition.




PART 1.                            . HISTORY


Date of construction:

       The carved sign now over the door of the church states that the

date of construction was 1883, and available sources agree on this

date (3; 5).


Chronology:

1883               Construction of the church (3),

T883-I936          Regular use of the church for services (4).
                                                   FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                                   (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                                   HABS No. IA-62    (^age 2)


1896               Osmund Sheldahl ceased preaching at the church (3).

Recent years       The walls were covered with plasterboard, which was

                   subsequently removed.   Electricity was also installed (5).

1968               The church was cleaned (4).

1973               The exterior was painted (4).

1974 June 30       The church was used for a memorial service in honor of

                   Osmund Sheldahl (4).

Architect or designer:

       Unknown, but probably Osmund Sheldahl,.

Original and subsequent owners:

       Since the death of the original owner, Osmund Sheldahl, the church

has always been owned by his heirs and presently by Anna Sheldahl (4).

Original and subsequent names:

       Originally, the congregation and church were called the First

Evangelical Lutheran Congregation of Sheldahl.        In popular usage, however,

the church became known as the Old Sheldahl Church or the Sheldahl

Lutheran Church.     Today it is officially called the Sheldahl Norwegian

Lutheran Church (2).

Contractors and supplies:

       The church was built by Osmund Sheldahl with the help of his sons,

Oliver and Henry, and some friends in the community (3).

       They also built the pulpit, altar, altar rail and pews.

       The lumber used was all locally grown and cut and was furnished

         by Sheldahl (3,5).

Historial events and persons associated with the building:

       The most significant figure associated with the church history is
                                               FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                               (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                               HABS No. IA-62   (Page 3)


that of Osmund Sheldahl (originally spelled "Schiedal").      The last of nine

children, he was born at Etne, S«Snnhordland, Norway, on February 4, 1824.

He was baptised on February 5, 1824 and was confirmed in the Stable

Church in Etne, Norway.     Though he had little formal schooling, he served

as a visitant teacher in the years before he left Norway for America.

        Before leaving Norway in 1845, he married Anna Tesdal, who subsequently

bore him nine children.     After her death in 1881, he married again in

1882 to Anna Tweedt, who bore him four children, and died in 1936 (3;8).

        Osmund Sheldahl came from Norway to the Fox River settlement (near

Lisbon) in Kendall County, Illinois-     This area had been settled by many

other Norwegians and he spent his first ten years in America here as a

farmer, parochial school teacher, and lay preacher (3).     However, there

was:no more government land available for $1.25 an acre in this area, so

Sheldahl and three other Norwegians came westward in 1854 in search of

land.     They decided to settle in the vicinity of the present Palestine

Lutheran Church, between the present towns of Huxley and Sheldahl (3).

On May 17, 1855, twenty-one families left Lisbon, Illinois, in covered

wagons, and on June 7 they arrived at their destination in Iowa (5).

 _      In 1860 Osmund Sheldahl was ordained by Pastor Hasselquist of the

Palestine Lutheran Church (3).

        In 1874, Sheldahl and J. S. Polk subdivided their adjoining lands

in Story, platting the town of Sheldahl.     Polk's land was about twice

the area of Sheldahl's (4.1, p. 389).

        In 1877 Sheldahl. built his house and moved to the new town bearing

his name.    At this time religious services were held in people's homes.
                                               FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                               (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                               HABS No. IA-62     '(Page k)


     In 1883, Pastor Sheldahl, with help from his sons Oliver and Henry

and some friends in the community, built the church, including the

pulpit-altar, altar rail, and pews.   Upon completion he "invited one and

all, who wanted Bible preaching, to come to the services, because he would

preach the Bible and nothing but the Bible," he said (3).     He preached

there until 1896, without pay (5).

     Osmund Sheldahl died on May 29, 1900.     Funeral services were held

for him in both Slater and Sheldahl, and he was buried at the Sheldahl

Lutheran Cemetery (8).   Services continued to be held at the church.

Sheldahl*s will, drawn up in 1898, specifically stated that the church

should be left as it was, not destroyed, for the use of anyone, no matter

what denomination, so long as the Bible was preached.     Upkeep of the

building was left in the hands of his heirs (5) ,

     After Sheldahl's death the church continued to be used regularly

until the death of his second wife in 1936.     Since then the church has

been used infrequently, only for special occasions.     On March 7, 1942,

Marion Sheldahl, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Martin Sheldahl and grand-

daughter of Osmund Sheldahl, was married in the church to Richard

Curphey, and on June 30, 1974 a memorial service honoring its founder

was held in the church (3).

     The church has been reshingled and painted.     The interior walls

at one time had been whitewashed, but later were covered with plaster-

board.   The plasterboard has been removed and the walls have been

restored to their original condition (3).     The original brass brackets

for kerosene lanterns are still in the building, although electric


 There is no record of the will having been recorded in either Polk or
 Story Counties from 1900 to 1933.
                                                 FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                                 (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                                 HABS No. IA-62    (Page 5)


lights have been installed (3).




PART 2.                           DESCRIPTION


Condition of the fabric:

     Fair, both interior and exterior.

Description of exterior:

     1. Overall dimensions: 28 feet 5 inches wide and 30 feet 7 5/8 inches

          long and 35 feet 1 inch high (1).

     2. Number of bays:      Not applicable,

     3. Number of stories:       One story with an attic.

     4. Layout shape:      Rectangular.

     5. Foundation:       Rubble and fieldstone laid on the ground with timber

          beams resting directly on the stones and serving as supports for

          the flooring.

     6. Wall construction:      Wood balloon frame construction (1).   Exterior

          clapboard with 4 to 4 1/2 Inches of each piece exposed. The

          siding is painted white and is nailed 2 feet on center with both

          round head and square head nails.

     7. Structural system:       Floor beams are native white pine rough

          timber.

     8. Porches:    There is a stoop in front of the entry doors consisting

          of eight concrete blocks, each 34 by 29 inches with a

          rectangle 18 1/2 by 14 inches scored in the surface.     The stoop

          has no roof or shelter.
                                            FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                            (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                            HABS No. IA-62    (Page 6)


 9.   Chimneys:     There Is a red brick chimney which rests on a bracket

      fastened to the timber framing of the north wall,     Tt flares

      out from the north wall on the interior of the church,

      approximately thirteen feet above the floor, and is continuous

      up through the ceiling and roof.

10.   Doorways and doors:     A pair of wood doors, painted white on the

      out3ide and each with two panels are at the entrance.     Each door

      Is approximately 2 feet by 7 feet and is held open or closed

      with metal locks.     There is a knob on the left door as one

      faces the building but no knob on the right door.     The entrance

      has a wood and iron threshold.

11.   Windows:     The windows are all double hung, each sash with four

      panes of glass.     The center vertical mullion of each sash is
      thicker than the horizontal mullion.

12.   Roof shape and covering:     The roof is a gable type with the

      ridge line running parallel with the long dimension of the

      plan.   There is a small roof supported on four white painted

      posts forming a belfry at the center of the roof front.

      Roofs are covered with wood shingles.

13.   Cornice, eaves:     The underside of the roof overhang is enclosed

      with wood.     There are no gutters or downspouts,

14.   Carved wooden sign above entrance door:     "Sheldahl Norwegian

      Lutheran Church founded in 1883 by Pastor Osmund Sheldahl."

      The lettering is Old English and is very well executed.    The

      sign appears to be new.
                                                FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                                (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN, LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                                HABS No. IA-62      (Page 7)


Description of interior:

     1.   Floor plans:     The church is rectangular with a central aisle from

          the entrance doors to the pulpit and altar rail.     There are

          eight pews facing the pulpit on the left side of the aisle and

          seven pews facing the pulpit on the right side of the aisle

          (left and right are taken as one enters the church).     In addition,

          to the right of the pulpit there are three pews running parallel

          to the aisle.     To the left of the pulpit is a raised platform

          used as the organ platform.     The pulpit is centered in the

          chancel and has steps leading up to it on both sides.     In front

          of the pulpit is a raised semicircular kneeling rail.     Beside

          the fourth and fifth pews immediately off the left of the central

          aisle is an iron pot-bellied stove.

     2.   Stairways:     None,

     3.   Flooring: - The floor is made of unfinished planks about five

          inches wide running across the church.     The raised organ plat-

          form (which has two old organs on it) is covered with brown and

          beige carpet and the kneeling pad and chancel floor in front

          of the pulpit is covered with red and black carpet.     There are

          striped runner carpets in the aisle and to the right of the

          kneeling rail.

     4.   Wall and ceiling finish:     The walls are covered with 1 inch thick
          horizontal whitewashed boards ranging in width from about 6 to

          18 inches.     There is a vertical-grooved, 38-inch-high wainscot

          painted a yellow-brown at all walls.     The ceiling is of wood

          planks about 5 inches wide running the length of the plan and
                                                  FIRST EVANGELICAL -LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                                 (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                                  HABS No» IA-62      (Page 8)


           is painted' a strong blue.

     5.    Doorways and doors:     The door frame and doors are painted yellow-

           brown on the inside.     There is also a blue painted trap door

           over the pulpit which leads to the attic,

     6.    Windows:     The window frames are painted yellow-brown on the

           inside.

     7.    Special decorative features, trim, and cabinet work:       There is a

          * simple scrollwork design on the brackets which support the bible

           stand at the front of the pulpit.      There are scrolled brass

           brackets for oil lamps installed on the walls but the lamps and

           extension brackets are kept by Mrs. Anna Sheldahl. in her home.

           The pulpit has panels similar to those on the entrance doors.

     8.    Mechanical equipment:     The pot-belly stove centrally located

           in the church is labeled "Old Hyprion" No. 5 by Solar Stove

           Works.     Harris and Zoiner.   Patent date 1868 (1).   There is a

           circular metal pipe leading from the stove overhead to the

           chimney.     The pipe is supported at 5 places by double wires.

           Electrical service, when needed, is provided by connecting

           the recently installed church electrical system to the

           Sheldahl home service lines (4).

Site and surroundings:

     The church is on private land owned by Anna Sheldahl, who lives

Immediately adjacent to the church on the left.        In front of the church

on the immediately adjacent lot is Osmund Sheldahl's house.
                                                 FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                                 (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN, LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                                 HABS No. IA-62      (Page 9)


                                BIBLIOGRAPHY



PART 3.

Primary or unpublished sources

1.    Aegerter, Robert, et. al.     "Sheldahl Lutheran Church."   Measured

      drawings prepared for the Historic American Buildings Survey,

      June 1956.

2.    Anderson, William L.     "Sheldahl Norwegian Lutheran Church." Historic

      American Buildings Survey, Inventory Form, 17 April 1971.

3.    Holen, Olaf.   "Brief Sketch of Pastor Osmund Sheldahl's Life."

      Church Bulletin for the Memorial Service held 30 June 1974.

4.    Sheldahl, Anna.     Sheldahl, Iowa.   Interview, 5 July 1974.

4.1   Story County, Iowa.    Deed Record Town Lots G.


Secondary or published sources

5.    "Church Built in 1883 Still Stands—Centers Historical Records of
      Osmund Sheldahl."     Undated newspaper article framed and hung in

      the Sheldahl Norwegian Lutheran Church.

6.    "More on the Records of Osmund Sheldahl."      undated newspaper article

      framed and hung in the Sheldahl Norwegian Lutheran Church. *

7.    Newspaper article with unknown title and date framed and hung in the

      Sheldahl Norwegian Lutheran Church.

8.    "Obituary of 0. Sheldahl Reveals Much History."     Undated newspaper

      article framed and hung in the Sheldahl Norwegian Lutheran Church.
                                                   FIRST EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
                                                   (SHELDAHL NORWEGIAN. LUTHERAN CHURCH)
                                                   HABS No. IA-62      (Page 10)


•



                                       APPENDIX



         The church was originally organized under the name of the First

    Evangelical Lutheran Congregation of Sheldahl, Story County, Iowa.     Its

    charter members were:

    Halvor 0. Sheldahl                          Eric Tesdahl

    Sire Sheldahl                              Olie Houge

    Halvor H. Tesdahl                          Volborg Houge

    Guro Tesdahl                               John 0, Houge

    Olie H. Tesdahl                             Sjur 0. Houge

    Tom Rasmus sen                             Anfin 0. Houge

    Anjer Rasmussen                            Torjon Houge

    Halvor Thomson                             Anna Houge

    Aselina Thomson                             Iver Fisher

    Nels C. Veste                              Oliva Fisher     (5)

    Eare S. Veste

    Steen N. Veste




    Field inspection, research, and -writing of report: Greg Stephen Hutchinson,
         Research Assistant, Iowa State University, 1973-1971*

    Editing:   Wesley Ivan Shank, Associate Professor, Iowa State University, 1973-197^

    Reviewed for HABS "by:   Druscilla J. Null, Historian, Summer, 1983
