                                                                    lOLOtf

                                                                    I-
MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE                                      HAER No. IA-66
Iowa Bridges Recording Project
Spanning Middle Creek at Ventura Road,
 1.2 miles North of Rose Hill
Rose Hill Vicinity
Mahaska County
Iowa




                    BLACK & WHITE PHOTOGRAPHS

               REDUCED COPIES OF MEASURED DRAWINGS

            :EROGRAPHIC   COPIES   OF   COLOR TRANSPARENCIES

              WRITTEN HISTORICAL & DESCRIPTIVE DATA




              HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                       National Park Service
                    Department of the Interior
                           P.O. Box 37127
                   Washington, D.C. 20013-7127
                                                                   HA e&
                 HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD              lDU.)f\

                         MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE                       Q>fi-ROHM>

                                                        HAER No. IA-66
Location:                  Spanning Middle Creek at Ventura Avenue;
                           1.2 miles north of Rose Hill, Mahaska
                           County, Iowa
                           UTM: 15.544900.4576480
                           USGS: Rose Hill, Iowa quadrangle
                                 (7.5 minute series, 1965)
Date of Construction:      c.1898
Designer:                  Thomas Seevers
Fabricator/Contractor:     Seevers Manufacturing Company
Present Owner:             Mahaska County, Iowa
Present Use:               Roadway bridge
Significance:              The Middle Creek Bridge, a 4-panel Pratt
                           pony truss, is one of only four bridges
                           remaining built by Seevers Manufacturing
                           Company, based in Oskaloosa, Iowa. The
                           use of steel pipe for the upper chord
                           was a standard design for the company,
                           which also manufactured steam pipes.
                           This bridge is an excellent example of
                           the company's work, an unusual
                           structural type designed and fabricated
                           by a small-scale Iowa company.
Historian:                 Leslie Pitner, August 1995
Project Information:       This document was prepared as a part of
                           the Iowa Historic Bridges Recording
                           Project performed during the summer of
                           1995 by the Historic American
                           Engineering Record (HAER). The project
                           was sponsored by the Iowa Department of
                           Transportation (IDOT). Preliminary
                           research was performed by Clayton B.
                           Fraser of Fraserdesign, Loveland,
                           Colorado.
                                             MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
                                                  HAER No. IA-66
                                                         (Page 2)

Bridge building in the United States during the late nineteenth
century was dominated by a few large national and regional
companies. Equipped with iron works and armies of agents, these
large firms could build hundreds of bridges a year. Within the
industry, however, opportunities were open for small companies
who focused on local markets. The Middle Creek Bridge is a
unique product of one such small scale firm, Seevers
Manufacturing, based in Oskaloosa, Iowa.
Iowa is graced with dozens of rivers and streams. While they
helped support the state's growth as a premier agricultural
producer, they also created the need for thousands of bridges to
span the waterways. This need is documented in the endless
petitions for bridges presented to the county boards of
supervisors who were the primary form of local government in
Iowa. It fell to each county to provide its own infrastructure
of roads and bridges. Rather than plan for the provision of such
roads, the boards responded to citizens' requests for new roads
and bridges. Bridge petitions were presented to the board, which
would then take the requests under consideration depending on the
state of the county Bridge Fund, the size and cost of the bridge,
and whether the bridge could be built by county labor or would
require an outside bridge contractor. The type of bridges built
in any given county depended on finances and the preferences of
the board which served. Some counties built relationships with
the large Midwest bridge building companies, such as the Wrought
Iron Bridge Company, Canton, Ohio, or King Iron Bridge Company,
Cleveland, Ohio. Others put out all contracts for bid or
established annual contracts with one company.
The bridge building and fabrication industry in the United States
grew exponentially during the second half of the nineteenth
century. As knowledge of engineering increased, bridge building
went from empirical carpenter-built bridges to scientifically
designed and calculated truss bridges. The advent of widely
available wrought iron accelerated the move away from timber and
combination wood and iron bridges to all iron truss bridges. The
iron trusses created a business opportunity to design and market
these iron bridges to local officials. To fill this need, large
national and regional companies were created, such as King Iron,
which was building about 250 bridges a year in the 1880s and 90s.
Opportunities also abounded, however, for smaller, local
businesses to succeed.
One such businessman was Thomas Seevers of Oskaloosa, Mahaska
County. The Middle Creek Bridge is one of only four remaining
bridges built by Seevers. His company, Seevers Manufacturing,
which began as a foundry producing steam pipes, had great success
building bridges. Bridge building was a particularly auspicious
                                                   MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
                                                        HAER No. IA-66
                                                               (Page 3)
business in Mahaska County. Five creeks or rivers cross the
county - North Skunk River, Middle Creek, South Skunk River,
Muchakinock Creek, and the Des Moines River. As stated in the
1878 county history: "Few counties have been called upon for
larger expenditure for bridges than Mahaska. Crossed as the
county is by three large streams and a number of smaller ones,
the expense of1 building and maintaining bridges has been
considerable."    Seevers Manufacturing stepped in to fill this
need in the 1890s.
Thomas Seevers was a member of one of Oskaloosa's most prominent
families, the son of one of the original settlers of the county.
In 1842, the U.S. Government bought the territory of Iowa from
the Sauk and Fox tribes, of which Mahaska County2 was a part,
which the Indians were to vacate in May of 1843.    In 1844, the
Territorial Legislature passed the organization for Mahaska and
other counties, and in the same year, 3the County Commissioners
laid out the county seat of Oskaloosa.    In 1843, three Seevers
families settled in Oskaloosa. Newton and James Seevers were
brothers who moved to Iowa from Virginia. Their cousin James,
from Ohio, joined them later that year. These three families
produced some of the most prominent men in Oskaloosa.4 W.H.
Seevers, a cousin of Thomas, was a member of the state
legislature and served on the Supreme Court of Iowa. Byron
Seevers, another cousin, was a lawyer and mayor of Oskaloosa at
the turn of the century.5
Thomas Seevers was born in 1848, the son of Newton Seevers. In
1867, he bought out a local foundry which served as the basis for
his company. By the mid-1890s, bridge building had become the
most profitable part of the business, which also included boilers




     *The History of Mahaska County, its cities, towns, etc..
(Des Moines: Union Historical Company, 1878), 311.
     2
     Leland L. Sage, A History of Iowa.        (Ames, Iowa:   The Iowa
State University Press, 1974), 72-3.
     3
         The History of Mahaska County. 2-3.
     4
     Semira Phillips, Proud Mahaska. 1843-1900 (Oskaloosa, Iowa:
Herald Printers, 1900), 123-4.
     ^anoah Hedge, Past and Present of Mahaska County. (Chicago:
The S.J. Clarke Publishing Co., 1906), 337.
                                                    MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
                                                         HAER No. IA-66
                                                               (Page 4)
and steam and hot water heaters.6 Most of Seevers' bridge
business came from Mahaska County. During the 1890s, Seevers
Manufacturing had yearly contracts to provide all the "iron"
bridges under 64 feet for the county. These contracts paid
Seevers by the lineal foot and specified the use of his steel
pipes. The pipes that Seevers used to construct his bridges were
the same pipes that he manufactured for the steam heaters.
Seevers supplied his distinctively designed pipe7 trusses to the
county in the subsequent years until about 1905.
The pipe truss configuration of the Middle Creek Bridge,
different from virtually every other bridge type in Iowa, was
standard for Seevers. Although they were durable, economical,
and structurally sound, Seevers' bridges never found widespread
acceptance in the state, and Seevers was never a major player
outside of southeastern Iowa. He died  in 1910, and the firm was
continued by his family until 1923.8
THE PIPE TRUSS
The Middle Creek Bridge is 4-panel Pratt pony truss. The truss
span is 50', with a wooden approach span bringing the total
length to 93', and has a 12'9" roadway width. It is configured
in Seevers' typical fashion with steel pipe upper chords and
square wrought-iron eyebar lower chords. The diagonals are round
iron eyerods. The pipes are joined by cast-iron bearing shoes
and hip blocks; the other members are joined using more
conventional pinned connections.
While his materials were unique, Seevers used the mainstay truss
type of the nineteenth century. Thomas Pratt was the designer of
one of the first trusses in America based on scientific analysis.
Born in 1812, he studied engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute in Troy, New York. After graduation, he was hired by
the United States Army Engineers to work on the construction of
dry docks. After a few years, he began work as a bridge engineer


     6
     H. Kirk Watkins, ed., Oskaloosa. Mahaska County. Iowa
Illustrated 1896. (Oskaloosa: Times Company, 1896), 27;
Oskaloosa City Directories: 1892-99, held at the Mahaska County
Historical Society, Oskaloosa, Iowa.
     7
      Mahaska County Board of Supervisors Minutes, Book 6, 10
(January 18, 1898) and 149 (January 11, 1899); Fraserdesign,
MAHA06 "Bridge," Iowa Historic Bridge Inventory, prepared for
the Iowa Department of Transportation, 1993.
     8
         0skaloosa City Directories:   1882-1931.
                                             MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
                                                  HAER No, IA-66
                                                         (Page 5)
for the railroad.9 Pratt received a patent with his father Caleb
Pratt on a truss in 1844. It was designed to have parallel
chords, with the verticals, upper chord, and end posts in
compression, and the bottom chord and diagonals in tension. The
parallel chords and equal panel lengths allowed for standardized
lengths for the vertical, diagonals, and chord members, making
the truss efficient to construct and manufacture.10 The Pratt
truss was the most widely used truss in Iowa during the boom of
bridge building which took place in the last decades of the
nineteenth century.
Joining the Pratt truss type with Seevers' steel pipes made for
an extremely efficient structure. The pipe configuration works
well, as a cylinder is the most efficient shape under buckling, a
phenomenon related to high compressive force. In a Pratt truss,
the upper chord is subject to compression, while the lower chord
experiences tension. This bridge is technologically significant
as a well-preserved example of an unusual, but effective,
structure, designed and fabricated by a small-scale Iowa company.




     9
     Carl W. Condit, American Building Art: The Nineteenth
Century. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1960), 109-10.
     10,Condit,   111.
                                              MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No, IA-66
                                                          (Page 6)
SOURCES CONSULTED
Condit, Carl W. American Building Art: The Nineteenth Century.
     New York: Oxford University Press, 1960.
Iowa Historic Bridge Inventory, vol. 2. MAHA06, Bridge.
     Loveland, Colorado: FRASERdesign, produced for the Iowa
     Department of Transportation, 1986.
Hedge, Manoah. Past and Present of Mahaska County.    Chicago:
     The S.J. Clarke Publishing Co., 1906.
The History of Mahaska County, its cities, towns, etc.   Des
     Moines: Union Historical Company, 1878.
Mahaska County Board of Supervisors Minutes, Book 6, at Mahaska
     County Courthouse, Oskaloosa, Iowa.
Oskaloosa Citv Directory: 1882-1931, held at Mahaska County
     Historical Society, Oskaloosa, Iowa.
Phillips, Semira. Proud Mahaska. 1843-1900.   Oskaloosa, Iowa:
     Herald Printers, 1900.
Sage, Leland L. A History of Iowa.   Ames, Iowa:   The Iowa State
     University Press, 1974.
Watkins, H. Kirk, ed. Oskaloosa. Mahaska County. Iowa.
     Illustrated 1896. Oskaloosa: The Times Company, 1896.
ADDENDUM TO                                                    HAir'li No. iA-66
MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
Iowa Historic Bridges Recording Project                     ffflET?
Spanning Middle Creek at Ventura Road            ,          iDuoft
Rose Hilt vie.                                               /      u . ^
Mahaska Comity                                               tod-NOW- ,
Iowa                                                          ' """




                   WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                     HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                National Park Service
                                 1849 C Street, NW
                                Washington, DC 20240
                                                                                       ADDENDUM TO
                                                                                 MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE
                                                                                        HAERNo.IA-66
                                                                                               (Page 7)

                         HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD                                 ffrt&Z
                                                                                              IOOOA
                                        MIDDLE CREEK BRIDGE                                   (o%~ftDttl>^j
                                                                                               I -
This appendix is an addendum to a 6-page report previously transmitted to the Library of Congress.


APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Interested readers may consult the Historical Overview of Iowa Bridges, HAER No. IA-88: "This
historical overview of bridges in Iowa was prepared as part of Iowa Historic Bridges Recording
Project -1 and II, conducted during the summers of 1995 and 1996 by the Historic American
Engineering Record (HAER). The purpose of the overview was to provide a unified historical
context for the bridges involved in the recording projects."
