     Reinforced Concrete Bridge (Melan Bridge)                    HAER No. IA-15
     Spanning Dry Creek
     Rock Rapids vicinity
     Lyon County
     Iowa




                        WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                         Historic American Engineering Record
                                 National Park Service
                              Department of the Interior
                                Washington, D. C. 20240



r^
                                                                          Co
                       HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD                        *




                     REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGE (Melan Bridge)

                                  HAER No. IA-15



Location:                 Spanning Dry Creek
                          Rock Rapids Vicinity, Lyon County, Iowa

Date of Construction      1893

Builder/Des igner;        Frederick Von Emberger of Vienna, Austria

Present Use:              Scheduled for demolition

Significance:             One of the first reinforced concrete bridges built in
                          the United States, it is located in Lyon County, 4-1/2
                          miles southeast of Rock Rapids, Iowa. It was built in
                          1893 by Frederick Von Emberger, famous Austrian
                          designer, who was at that time the official
                          representative of Joseph Melan, Vienese engineer.
                          Melan was granted an American patent for his method of
                          bridge reinforcement using concrete. The span is
                          thirty feet. The rise of the arch is three feet and
                          the roadway sixteen feet. The thickness of the arch
                          at the crown is six inches. The reinforcing is of the
                          style known as the Melan System and, in this case,
                          consists of five 4" I-beams. The side walls are faced
                          with Sioux Falls jasper. The hand rail is of gas
                          pipe. The cement used was imported from Germany and
                          cost $3.25 per barrel. The mixture of one part cement
                          to two parts sand to four parts broken jasper. The
                          bridge cost $830.00.

Transmitted by:           Jean P. Yearby, HAER, 1984
MELAN ARCH BRIDGE                                     HAER No.   IA-15
(Reinforced Concrete Arch Bridge)
Iowa Bridges Recording Project
Emma Slater Park
Rock Rapids -
Lyon County
Iowa

ADDENDUM TO
REINFORCED CONCRETE ARCH BRIDGE
Rack Rapids itc.
Lyon County
Iowa




                    BLACK & WHITE PHOTOGRAPHS

               REDUCED COPIES OF MEASURED DRAWINGS

              WRITTEN HISTORICAL & DESCRIPTIVE DATA




              HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                      National Park Service
                    Department of the Interior
                          P.O. Box 37127
                   Washington, D.C. 20013-7127
                                                       ADDENDUM TO
                                   REINFORCED CONCRETE ARCH BRIDGE
                                                    HAER No. IA-15
                                                           (Page 2)
                HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                         MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                 (Reinforced Concrete Arch Bridge)
                                                       HAER No. IA-15
Location:                 Emma Sater park bordering Route 9 on the
                          eastern limit of Rock Rapids, Lyon
                          County, Iowa. Moved from county road 2.3
                          miles southeast of Rock Rapids.
                          UTM: 14.730310.4812580
                          USGS: Rock Rapids, Iowa quadrangle
                                (7.5 minute series, 1971)
Date of Construction:     1894
Designer:                 Frederick von Emperger, Vienna, Austria;
                          Josef Melan (inventor), Austria
Contractor:               W.S. Hewett, Minneapolis, MN.
                          John Olsen (builder), Rock Rapids, IA.
Present Use:              Pedestrian Bridge
Significance:             Constructed in 1894, the Melan Arch
                          Bridge marks the first experiment in
                          using the innovative concrete-steel
                          system developed by Austrian Josef
                          Melan. At the urging of a Midwestern
                          contractor, Frederick von Emperger,
                          Melan's representative in America,
                          designed a 30 foot concrete arch
                          reinforced with structural steel to span
                          a seasonal stream outside of the small
                          town of Rock Rapids in Northwest Iowa.
                          Although von Emperger's specifications
                          called for 4" I-beams, bent to the
                          elliptical shape of the arch and spaced
                          at 3' intervals, local legend holds that
                          the contractor reinforced the structure
                          with railroad rails to spare expense.
                          Von Emperger went on to design several
                          more arches in the United States, all
                          with dimensions more impressive than
                          this first modest venture. However, the
                          Rock Rapids bridge remains his most
                          significant work, and the Melan system
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No, IA-15
                                                          (Page 3)
                         he introduced there, was adopted widely
                         during the first part of the twentieth
                         century for highway bridges and
                         pedestrian spans.
Historian:               Juliet Landler, engineer,
                         August, 1995
Project
Information:             This document was prepared as part of
                         the Iowa Historic Bridges Recording
                         Project during the summer of 1995 by the
                         Historic American Engineering Record
                         (HAER). The project was sponsored by the
                         Iowa Department of Transportation
                         (IDOT). Preliminary research on this
                         bridge was performed by Clayton B.
                         Fraser of Fraserdesign, Loveland, CO.

In April 1894, a young Austrian named Frederick von Emperger
presented a paper at the annual meeting of the American Society
of Civil Engineers extolling the wonders of a new modern building
material which he called concrete-iron, and which is known today
as reinforced concrete.1 Examples of concrete-iron construction
in the United States were rare, he explained, but in Europe this
new technology had been in use for at least 16 years, having
applications in floor, ceiling, and bridge construction. After
giving a detailed history of the development of reinforced
concrete, von Emperger offered a list of reasons why the
combination of concrete and iron was superior to other building
materials, and why this composite material was ideally suited to
bridge construction. He described three innovative systems for
reinforcing concrete arches: the Monier, the Wunsch, and the
Melan. The young Austrian was particularly partial to the latter
system which was distinguished by its use of steel I-beams as
reinforcement, and which had proven to be strongest when
subjected to load testing experiments in Austria.2 This system,

     ^mperger's paper, "The Development and Recent Improvement
of Concrete-Iron Bridges," was read April 4, 1894 and published
in Transactions-American Society of Civil Engineers. Volume 31,
437-457. An interesting discussion followed, 458-488.
     2
     The Austrian Society of Engineers and Architects sponsored
a series of experiments to determine the merits of different
systems of reinforcement in the late 1890s. Under supervision,
the inventor Josef Melan conducted many of these tests from 1886-
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No. IA-15
                                                          (Page 4)
he was convinced, could be used to span distances greater than
any existing concrete bridge. In fact, for von Emperger, there
was "no reason why a system, which has proven better than stone,
should not be3 extended and reach the highest span in use with
iron arches."   There was one problem: no bridge using this
innovative system had been built yet for public use. "To
accomplish this in Europe, there is needed, not only the right
man and the right place, but also a third one, the right
official, who will give his permit. Those three have not yet
met," he lamented and cited the government as "an obstacle to
progress." Von Emperger concluded his long speech by challenging
his audience, "on this account the engineers of this  country have
a good opportunity to surpass European structures."4
It is likely that a man from Minnesota was in attendance that
evening. For soon after the lecture, W.S. Hewitt, a contractor,
contacted von Emperger and asked him to draw up plans for a small
bridge to be constructed in the northwest corner of Iowa.
Hewitt's company was based in Minneapolis, but much of his work
was conducted in parts of rural Minnesota, Iowa, and South Dakota
where the land had been settled only recently, and the demand for
bridges was high. In 1894, the year von Emperger presented his
paper, Hewitt held multiple-bridge   contracts with several
counties in Northern Iowa.5 6In Lyon County he had an agreement to
build all their new bridges.
Lyon County had been settled during the last few decades of the
nineteenth century, making it one of Iowa's youngest counties.
Although the United States Government had obtained the land in a
1851 agreement with the Sioux Indians, it was not until 1869 that
the last tribes left reluctantly. For the previous few
centuries, with its lush prairies and flowing streams, Lyon
County had been popular hunting territory for numerous tribes.

1890, and from these experiments, Emperger supplies results.
     Von Emperger, 57.
     4
      Ibid.
     5
     Meuser, a former employee of Emperger, in his article in
The Cornell Engineer, writes that Hewitt held a blanket contract
with two or three counties in Iowa for 1894.
     6
      In Book 3 of Proceedings of the Lyon County Board of
Supervisors, it was recorded on Nov. 12, 1894 that Hewitt was
owed $3,007 for bridges built thus far that year. No other bridge
contracts are mentioned in the records for 1894.
                                                   MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                      HAER NO. IA-15
                                                             (Page 5)
Not only had the area provided them with much game, but these
were the sacred grounds where they had buried their dead.7 The
pioneers continued their migration west after the Civil War
ended. Rock Rapids, the county seat, was founded in 1885.
Despite the untamed wilderness, the first settlers of Lyon County
made profitable farms out of their sizeable plots, and their
prosperity attracted small industries to the area. Several banks
set up branches in the county's larger towns. In early 1893, a
manufacturing company specializing in world-class banjos moved
its headquarters from Chicago to Rock Rapids. That same year,
traveling shows began passing through the town almost once a
month, and the first county fair was organized. The community's
success seemed almost short-lived when months later, a localized
depression hit the area. Several of the banks and the banjo
factory were forced to close. A drought in 1894 only worsened
conditions, and local rail service became irregular.
Seemingly unfettered by the economic situation, local leaders
pressed ahead with their efforts to improve the county's
infrastructure. On April 5, 1894 the county board of supervisors
approved petitions for the building of eighteen bridges. The
board was hardly extravagant in granting these requests. In
sixteen of the eighteen cases they decided that the bridges,
having spans from 40 to 60 feet, should be constructed out of
wood, the most inexpensive option available. Of the remaining
two bridges, an iron truss was specified for an 80-foot span, and
a combination bridge for a 60-foot span. Not surprisingly,
reinforced concrete, or concrete-iron construction is not
mentioned anywhere in the minutes of the Lyon County Board of
Supervisors for the year 1894.
Why Hewitt thought Rock Rapids was an ideal site to try out a new
form of bridge construction is somewhat of a mystery. At the time
the city was not even a decade old. It was a growing community,
but still small. No large cities or major waterways were located
nearby. Steel I-beams and a fine quality cement were not
available locally. The area, however, afforded one railroad
line. Yet what Lyon County lacked in material goods, it made up
for in pioneer spirit, and perhaps, this is what first attracted
Hewitt. The early settlers shared a love for the new and the
unexplored and many were looking to make their mark on the world.
Hewitt already knew of one man in Rock Rapids who would
wholeheartedly support the idea of reinforced concrete bridge.
His name was John Olsen. In 1894 Olsen was still very young, but

     7
         Some of these sacred burial mounds can be seen today.
     8
      Smith, Paul and Lucy Jo Colby, Buncombe to 'Twenty Two, 78.
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No. IA-15
                                                          (Page 6)
he had already won a 9$4,000 commission to construct one of Rock
Rapids' new churches.    In addition to being a respected builder,
Olsen was a keen businessman and had established a small
factory making concrete blocks. Years later the focus of his
business changed from manufacturing concrete block to
manufacturing a machine which formed concrete block, an invention
Olsen had patented. Throughout the early history of Rock Rapids,
he was an active promoter of concrete technology, so it is not
surprising that Hewitt contacted him for help in construction the
first Melan Arch bridge. Records list Hewitt as the contractor
of the bridge, and credit Olsen as the builder.
According to local sources, the Lyon County Board of Supervisors
was not particularly receptive to the idea of building a
reinforced concrete bridge, and Fritz von Emperger was obliged to
make the journey to Rock Rapids himself to convince town leaders.
The board finally agreed on the condition that the concrete
structure would cost no more than a bridge made of wood.10
Years later von Emperger reflected about the difficulties he
encountered with his early projects in the United States, "..at
this time there was no reliable American cement and I had no
contractor of ... experience. I had to build those bridges
myself and to be ... my own foreman."11
Hewitt chose a spot for the bridge just outside of Rock Rapids on
a county road not far from the railroad tracks. While its
location was convenient, this selection of the site was
especially appropriate for such a venture because months earlier
a prairie12 fire had destroyed the wooden bridge spanning the
crossing.     The bridge traversed a small tributary of the Rock
River known locally as Dry Run. Dry Run is a seasonal stream and
in 1894, a year with very little rainfall, it is likely that no
water was running through this gully.
Von Emperger delivered his plans for the bridge in June and
construction began immediately. Cement had been ordered from
Germany at cost of $3.00 per barrel, $3.25 including
transportation. Melan's system called for the insertion of steel

     9
      Buncombe to 'Twentv-Two. 76.
     10
      George Raveling, a local historian, recounted this in a
1930s article about the bridge for the Sioux Citv Journal.
     "Draffin, History of Concrete. 35.
     12
      Proceedinas of the Lvon County Board of Supervisors. Book
3, 153.
                                                 MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                    HAER No. IA-15
                                                           (Page 7)
I-beams in the concrete structure, and early technical reports
describe13the Rock Rapid bridge as being constructed with 4 or 5"
I-beams.    However, no receipts for any metal purchase have been
found and the local legend holds that old railway stock was used
in an effort to save money. This, of course, would be consistent
with rural construction practices. In either case, the
reinforcing elements were bent to the desired arch shape and
spaced 3' apart. The arch has a span of 30', a rise of 3', and
width of 16'. The depth of the arch's crown measures 6".      The
concrete mixture was one part of cement to two parts sand and
four parts broken jasper. Since a plain concrete finish was not
found to be particularly aesthetically pleasing, Olsen faced the
spandrel wall with Sioux Falls jasper, a stone quarried in South
Dakota which had been used previously in the some of Rock Rapid's
more important buildings. The hand rail    was made of 4" gas pipe.
The total cost of the bridge was $830.14 Von Emperger, as
engineer of the bridge and owner 15of the US patent for the Melan
system, received a sum of $25.60.
Construction of the bridge went swiftly, and it was opened to
traffic that year. For 70 years the Melan bridge carried
automobiles and farm machinery with minimal 16
                                             maintenance.   The
bridge was not, however, free from incident.     Railing posts
have been replaced at least twice: the first was damaged in a car
accident, while the second post was taken out during an attempt
to move a house across the bridge.
In 1964, the bridge was almost destroyed when state highway
officials deemed its width of 16' too narrow. Kenneth Wallace,
the county engineer, however, recognized its significance and
spearheaded an effort to save it. The county board of
supervisors agreed to contribute the cost of demolition, about
$2,500, to moving the bridge to a new site in Rock Rapids if the
community could raise in one month's time the remaining $4,913
necessary for its transport. With contributions from the Kiwanis

     13,,
       First Reinforced Concrete Bridge," 1915 Iowa State Highway
Commission Annual Report, 55; and Meuser, The Cornell Engineer.
May 1925.
     Iowa State Highway Commission.
     15
       Meuser, The Cornell Engineer, p. 163.
     16
      Soon after the bridge was completed a local farmer lost his
life on the bridge when a cow he was leading became
uncontrollable, entangling him in the lead ropes and tossing him
over the rail. Raveling, Sioux City Journal.
                                               MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                  HAER No. IA-15
                                                        (Page 8)
Club, E.O. Olsen (son of John Olsen), and many citizens of Lyon
County, the goal was reached, and the reinforced concrete arch
was moved  about 4 miles to a roadside park on the east side of
town.17   An unremarkable concrete structure, with a 28' foot
width and $17,000 price-tag, replaced the Melan arch.
Moving a concrete bridge is not a venture that has been tried
often. The transport of the Melan Arch was a complicated
procedure requiring three phases.18 The first phase was removal
of the bridge from its site at Dry Run and placing it on rollers.
To prevent the arch from spreading, the bridge was first heavily
braced with wood. The abutments were tied with five steel rods
which absorbed the arch's lateral thrust. The next phase
involved transporting the bridge to its new site on state highway
property.19  The bridge, including bracing, weighed about 90
tons which was a load large enough to burst  all the tires of the
first flatbed upon which it was placed.20 Eventually, the
contractors, Graves Construction Company, succeeded in carrying
the bridge to its present site on a 40 wheel flatbed. The bridge
was situated on new concrete pedestals in the final phase. Then
the contractor built earth approaches to the floor bed so that it
could be crossed by pedestrians.
On September 3, 1964 the Melan bridge was dedicated as a memorial
to the county pioneers who built the community. With its
placement next to the highway at the eastern edge of town, the
concrete arch was to serve as reminder to those who entered Rock
Rapids of the historic achievements and visionary foresight of
the town's early settlers. In the 1960s its setting with

     l7
      From several 1964 articles of the Lvon County Reporter,
including: "Moving of bridge is underway now," April 30; "Saving
old bridge a worthy project" April 6; 'Save the Bridge' project
spurts as time narrows," March 23; "Schedule start of work
Wednesday morning on moving of old bridge" April 23.
     18
      "Bids opened at Friday meeting of supervisors," Lvon County
Reporter. March 2, 1964. In addition to the local newspaper,
several publications relating to construction and concrete
covered the move.
     19
      Another park on the west side of town had been also
proposed as a resting place for the old bridge, but moving the
bridge across the river and across railroad tracks would have
increased the costs of operation significantly.
     20
      From a personal conversation with Roscoe Pettengill, a Rock
Rapids resident who was active in the effort to save the bridge.
                                                    MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                       HAER No. IA-15
                                                              (Page 9)
neighboring properties was quite natural. Today the Melan bridge
sits in the shade of Rock Rapids' massive new water tower,
surrounded by playground equipment and barbecues. The site has
been renamed Emma Sater Park.
A plaque in front of the memorial which reads, "The First
Reinforced Concrete Bridge" is misleading, as were many of the
articles written during the campaign to save the bridge. The
Rock Rapids arch was not the first reinforced concrete bridge
built in the United States, but the first reinforced concrete
bridge built using the Melan System. Von Emperger knew this
himself and wrote in his 1894 article, "the writer knows of but
three concrete-iron bridges in this country."21 He failed to
list what bridges these were, or who had designed them, but this
was probably because they had not been a great influence on his
work.
Von Emperger clearly stated who he thought had made the most
significant contributions in the development of reinforced
concrete, and these22 same men today are recognized as being the
subject's pioneers.     The idea of using iron and concrete
together came from France. As far back as the eighteenth century
French architects had proposed using iron beams to strengthen
their masonry against bending. Architects and builders in the
United States and England adopted the idea during the first half
of the nineteenth century, and it was an Englishman, William
Wilkinson, who first extended this technique to concrete.23 He
received a patent for Mimbedding a grid of wire rod into a
concrete slab in 1854.     Von Emperger fails to mention Wilkinson
in his report, and credits the Frenchman Josef   Monier with the
invention of the concrete-iron combination.25 In 1867 Monier
obtained a patent for using wire mesh to strengthen the concrete
of his gardening pots and tubs. On the subject of Monier's
discovery of reinforced concrete, von Emperger writes, "it is
idle to state that he was not the discoverer of the process; but
he perceived the value of his method, developed it with the help
of trained engineers and capitalists, and, what is always the

     2l
       Von Emperger, 439.
     22
          Ibid, 438-445.
     23
          Elliot, Technics and Architecture. 176-177.
     ^Condit, American Building. 168; and Elliot, 165.
     25
      Monier is considered by many to be the inventor of
reinforced concrete.
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER NO. IA-15
                                                        (Page 10)
most important, he made a success of it."26 Francois Coignet
introduced the idea of using iron bars as reinforcement at the
Paris Exposition also in 1867. Von Emperger mentions that the
Coignet system had been employed in constructing many successful
bridges in Europe with spans ranging from 75 to 140 feet.27
However, this was not the system he had come to America to
promote.
In his speech, von Emperger mentioned three Americans who had
made significant contributions to the development of reinforced
concrete, Phineas Ball of Massachusetts, N. Poulson of New York,
and Ernest Ransome of California.28 It was Ransome who built the
very first reinforced concrete bridge in the United States in
1889, five years before von Emperger built his in Rock Rapids.
Ransome's bridge had a clear span of only 20', but its width was
64', making it resemble more a barrel vault than an arch. This
bridge stills stands in its original location in Golden Gate Park
in San Francisco. Unlike the Melan Bridge which was constructed
with stiff steel members, the Ransome bridge used a grid of iron
rods as reinforcement. Von Emperger probably knew of this bridge,
although he never refers to it directly in his report.
While Ransome's placement of reinforcement resembles modern
practice much more than the Melan system it predated, the latter
system proved to be the popular model with early concrete bridge
builders.29 Its attractiveness was rooted in its conservative
approach. A Melan arch, with its skeleton of bulky bent steel
members, looked more trustworthy than a concrete arch made with a




     26
       von Emperger, 439.
     "ibid.440.
Another Frenchman Francois Hennibique later built an empire
exploiting the basic premise behind this invention. His
modifications to this system were widely published and patented
in Europe, and his ideas were just beginning to take hold in
America during the 1890s. His method set precedence for many of
the later developments in reinforced concrete technology.
     28
          von Emperger, 439.
     29
      This is not to say the Ransome bridge was not copied. In
fact the second bridge, built in Chicago the following year, used
the same system.
                                               MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                  HAER NO. IA-15
                                                       (Page 11)
flimsy iron grid. It was also easier to construct.   Von Emperger
emphasized these points,
    "The (I) beams are, of course, the stiffest shape to be
    had. They are a kind of centering (in themselves). It
    is not difficult to show that these bent beams would
    safely carry alone the load intended, and it is hard to
    understand why this simple construction has not been
    thought of before. Simplicity in all details is a
    property which will certainly be appreciated in this
    country. No strain sheets, no worked-out plans, are
    needed. All that we must know are four figures  - span,
    rise, section of beam, and distance between."30
Von Emperger was a good salesman. "It is a very remarkable
saving of iron, and at the same time, an advance in strength,"
he boasted.31 Of course, this was not entirely true. The
concrete arch had indeed been strengthened, but by an inefficient
use of steel. In the 1890s, engineers and builders had not yet
acquired the confidence to know that they could get by with much
less steel, although they did understand the basic principles
behind the workings of reinforced concrete. They knew that
concrete was ten times stronger in compression than in tension,
and that arch bridges would fail in tension if there were loaded
non-uniformly. Designers of traditional plain arches had avoided
tensile failures by building their arches with sturdy
proportions. This way the dead load would be so massive that the
effects of any erratic live load would be inconsequential. Those
who had studied some engineering knew about the middle third rule
which stated that the line of the force 32
                                         must follow a path that
approximated the centerline of the arch.    If the line of force
was swayed out of the middle third portion to the interior
(intrados) or exterior edge (extrados) of the arch, areas of
tensile stress would be created causing the arch to crack and
potentially, to collapse.33 When steel, a material strong in
tension, is entered into the equation, the line of force no
longer needs to remain in the center third. Von Emperger thus
promoted his product, "This enables us to build flat as well as

     30
          Von Emperger, 444.
     31
       Ibid.
     32
      The line of force, or resulting force vector, approximates
the line of thrust in an arch.
     33
      This concept is presented and proven in fundamental static
courses.
                                               MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                  HAER NO. IA-15
                                                       (Page 12)
thin arches, saving 67% and more, in comparison with stone."34
It was difficult to prove this assertion in his first project, a
span of only thirty feet.   Fortunately, he would have many other
opportunities.
During his short stay in America, von Emperger established a
practice under the name of Melan Arch Construction Company in New
York City.35 After his first humble attempt at Rock Rapids, von
Emperger designed several other Melan Bridges which had much
more impressive dimensions. He began his next project less than
a year later in Cincinnati, Ohio. This bridge, built in Eden
Park, had a span had a span of 70 ft. In his next project, von
Emperger increased the span to 100 feet, having a 10 foot rise,
in his design for a footbridge in Stockbridge, Massachusetts.36
Von Emperger left the United States in 1895 or 1896, leaving his
firm under the leadership of his design engineer, William Meuser.
Meuser ran the company alone for several   years until forming a
partnership in 1900 with Edwin Thacher.37 A few years earlier,
while serving as the western agent for the Melan Arch Company,
Thacher had designed one of the most remarkable early Melan
bridges for the city of Topeka in 1896. Spanning the Kansas
River, the bridge was comprised of five arches, with the longest
measuring 125'. Although the Melan construction system remained
their specialty, Meuser and Thacher39 changed the firm's name to
Concrete Steel Engineering Company.     The Melan method spread
quickly, and in the first decade of the twentieth century, cities
across the country were requesting multiple arch designs for
their major river spans.
Despite the large quantities of steel required, the Melan system
remained popular in the United States through the 1930s, reaching

     M
          Von Emperger, 44.
     35
      From a deposition given by William Meuser in the Luten vs.
Marsh Engineering Company case, a bridge patent litigation suit
filed in Iowa in 1912. The defense was represented by the State
Attorney General.
     36
      Ute Georgeacopol, "Zwei Brucken im k.k. Hofstallgebaude."
Steinschlag. No. 101. Vienna. Oct-Dec, 1994.
     37Meuser,    Deposition, 117.
     38
      David Plowden, Bridges: The Spans of North America. Viking
Press. New York. 1974. 299.
     39
          Meuser. Deposition, 117 .
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No. IA-15
                                                        (Page 13)
considerable lengths. The Larimer Bridge in Pittsburgh,
constructed in 1912, had an arch spanning 280'. In 1923, the
Cappelen Memorial Bridge was built with a center span of 370'.*°
Unfortunately for von Emperger, the Melan system never enjoyed
the same success in Europe. Although von Emperger's enterprising
campaign is responsible for the immediate popularity of the
bridge type, the Melan System remained a favorite of American
bridge builders for two reasons: its conservative aesthetic
appeal, and the ease of its construction. Meuser once explained,

    "Labour in the United States is relatively expensive,
    from the labourer to the engineer. As a result,
    simpler designs ...are preferred. The Monier
    construction method, for example, has not gained foot
    hold...The Melan method immediately met with increasing
    interest primarily because the reinforcement was placed
    in the form of easy to assemble arches. This assured
    that a good bond between both materials could be
    expected even under the most unfavorable conditions."41
Despite its extensive use, the Melan system did not foretell new
directions in reinforced concrete design. With its substantial
structural reinforcement, the method instilled confidence in
turn-of-century bridge builders and engineers who were still
unsure of the possibilities of reinforced concrete. The Melan
Arch Bridge marks an important step in the history of the
material and in the history of bridge building. Although von
Emperger's tiny concrete-iron arch bears little resemblance to
the reinforced concrete spans of today, the system introduced in
Rock Rapids heralded a new age of American bridge design.




    40
      Hans Wittfoht, Building Bridges: History. Technology.
Construction. Beton-Verlag, Dusseldorf. 1984. 139-140.
     41
      From a article for a German journal ("Die Erfolge der
Eiseneinlage in den Eisenbetonbauten Nordamerikas." Deutscher
Beton-Verlag. Vortrage 1904. 115), as reprinted in Wittfoht.213
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No. IA-15
                                                        (Page 14)
SOURCES CONSULTED
The Central Constructor. "Bridge" June, 1964, 10-11.
Concrete Industry News. "Iowa Townspeople Unite to Save America's
     First Concrete Bridge,"
Condit, Charles W. American Building: Materials and Techniques
     form the First Colonial Settlements to the Present.
     University of Chicago, 1968.
The Des Moines Sunday Register. "Rally to Save Rural Bridge,"
     October 27, 1963.
Draffin, Jasper O. "A Brief History of Lime, Cement, Concrete,
     and Reinforced Concrete," Journal of the Western Society of
     Engineers. Vol. 48, March, 1943.
Elliot, Cecil D. Technics and Architecture. Massachusetts
     Institute of Technology, 1992.
Emperger, Fritz von. "The Development and Recent Improvement of
     Concrete-Iron Highway Bridges." Transactions - American
     Society of Civil Engineers. Vol. 31, April, 1894, 437-488.
Georgaeacopol, Ute. "Zwei Brucken im k.k. Hofstallgebaude,"
     Steinschlag. Vienna, October-December, 1994.
Iowa State Highway Commission, "First Annual Report." 1915, 55
Lyon County Board of Supervisors Minutes, Book 3, p. 153, 183.
Lvon County Reporter:
     "Bids opened at Friday meeting of supervisors," March 2,
     1964.
     "Billy McGraw first to cross old bridge," Jan. 30, 1963.
     "Bridge donation received here from Moville man," April 2,
     1964.
     "Bridge is National Historic Site", Nov. 11, 1974.
     "Build approaches to Melan Bridge in highway park," June 15,
     1964.
     "Contractor ends work on bridge,"
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No. IA-15
                                                        (Page 15)

    "Dedicate historic Melan bridge as memorial to county
    pioneers,' Sept. 3, 1964.

    "Fate of old bridge to be decided soon," Feb. 17, 1964.

    "Moving of bridge is underway now," April 30, 1964.

    "Saving old bridge a worthy project" April 6, 1964.
    "'Save the Bridge' project spurts as time narrows," March
    23, 1964.

    "Schedule start of work Wednesday morning on moving of old
    bridge" April 23, 1964.

    "Seek pledges to move bridge; reach $1,000 now," March 16,
    1964.
     "Smithsonian asks information on historic bridge in county,"

     "Substantial sum pledged for bridge moving program," March
     19, 1964.

     "Supervisors offer chance to save old bridge," March 5,
     1964.
     "Supervisors take necessary action to save bridge," April 2,
     1964.
Melan, Josef. Plain and Reinforced Concrete Arches. Translated by
     D.B. Steinman, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1917.

Meuser, Wm. The Cornell Civil Engineer. Vol. XX, No. 8, May 1925,
     162-163.

Meuser, Wm. Deposition. Luten vs. Marsh Engineering Company,
     (Iowa State Attorney General's File), 1912-1918.

National Register of Historic Places Inventory, Nomination Form -
     Melan Bridge, October 18, 1974.

Patent No. 505,054. J.Melan, Vault for Ceilings, Bridges, & c.,
     Sept 12, 1893.
Patent No. 583,464. F.Von Emperger, Vault for Ceilings, Bridges,
     & c., June 1, 1897.

Raveling, George. "First Reinforced Concrete Bridge in Nation was
     Built near Rock Rapids," Sioux Citv Journal. 1933.
                                                MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                   HAER No. IA-15
                                                        (Page 16)
Schneider, Charles C., "The Evolution of the Practice of American
     Bridge Building" Transactions - American Society of civil
     Engineers. Address at the Annual Convention, June 20, 1905,
     213-234
Smith, Paul and Lucy Jo Colby, Buncombe to 'Twenty-Two, a history
     of Rock Rapids assembled from articles from Lvon County
     Reporter, 1975, 70-78.
Standard Atlas. Lyon County, 1911.
Steinman, David B. Melan's Theory of Arches and Suspension
     Bridges. Moron Clark Publishing Co., 1913.
Tyrrell, Henry Grattan. History of Bridge Engineering. Chicago,
     1911.
ADDENDUM TO                                                 HAERNo. IA-15
MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
(Bridge, Reinforced Concrete Arch)
Iowa Historic Bridges Recording Project                     iOUJft
Emma Slater Park (Moved from Dry Run Creek)
Rock Rapids vicinity
                                                              I-
Lyon County
Iowa




                  WRTITEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                   HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                              National Park Service
                               1849 C Street, NW
                              Washington, DC 20240
                                                                                       ADDENDUM TO
                                                                                   MELAN ARCH BRIDGE
                                                                                        HAERNo.IA-15
                                                                                              (Page 17)

                         HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD                               frftEfc
                                                                                            (0U>A
                                         MELAN ARCH BRIDGE                                  bO-ROcftA.^j
                                    (Bridge, Reinforced Concrete Arch)                     /—

This appendix is an addendum to a 16-page report previously transmitted to the Library of Congress.


APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Interested readers may consult the Historical Overview of Iowa Bridges, HAER No. IA-88: "This
historical overview of bridges in Iowa was prepared as part of Iowa Historic Bridges Recording
Project -1 and II, conducted during the summers of 1995 and 1996 by the Historic American
Engineering Record (HAER). The purpose of the overview was to provide a unified historical
context for the bridges involved in the recording projects."

This bridge was also covered by the Structural Study of Reinforced Concrete Arch Bridges,
HAER No. IA-89: "Three reinforced concrete arch bridges, built in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century by three prominent engineers promoting this type of bridge design, were
selected for engineering analysis and evaluation based on modern structural theory and structural
theory as it was known at the time the bridges were constructed."
