                                                        AM£X
                                                         PEL
                                                        £-T0UJ5E->

    OTsSXEE.BiRIDGE NO. 424                      HAER No. DE-48
    Wiggins Mill Road (Road 446) spanning
    Wiggins Mill Pond Otitlet
    Townsend
    New Castle County
    Delaware




                            PHOTOGRAPHS
              WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




               HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                      National Park Service
                        Northeast Region
                    Philadelphia Support Office
                        U.S. CUstam House
                       200 Chestnut Street
                    Philadelphia, P.A.   19106


C
                                                                                   HAEK
                                                                                    PsL


                    HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                              STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                                                       HAERNo.DE-48


    LOCATION:                 Wiggins Mill Road (Road 446), spanning Wiggins Mill Pond
                              Outlet, Townsend, New Castle County, Delaware.

                              USGS Middletown, DE Quadrangle, UTM Coordinates:
                              18.439370.4361780

    DATE OF CONSTRUCTION:     1884

    BUILDER:                  Edge Moor Bridge Works (Wilmington, Delaware), for New
                              Castle County

    PRESENT OWNER:            Delaware Department of Transportation

    PRESENT USE:              Highway bridge

    SIGNIFICANCE:             Bridge No. 424 is a rare surviving representative of the
                              Warren pony-truss bridge type, a form of metal truss that was
                              commonly employed for small-scale rural crossings in
                              Delaware during the late nineteenth century. It is one of just
                              six metal truss bridges still in service in the state. The bridge
                              was built in 1884 by the Edge Moor Bridge Works of
                              Wilmington, Delaware, a nationally prominent manufacturer
                              of iron bridges during the period 1873-circa 1900.

    PROJECT INFORMATION:      An August 1996 evaluation of Bridge No. 424 resulted in a
                              recommendation of replacement. This recordation project
                              was undertaken pursuant to an agreement between DelDOT
                              and the Delaware State Historic Preservation Office. Bridge
                              No. 424 was recorded in November 1996 by the Cultural
                              Resource Group of Louis Berger & Associates, Inc., East
                              Orange, New Jersey, for DelDOT. Photography was
                              performed by Rob Tucher, Senior Photographer. Research
                              was conducted by Philip E. Pendleton, Architectural
                              Historian.




C
                                                                           STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                                                           HAERNo.DE-48 (Page 2)
    DESCRIPTION

    Built in 1884, State Bridge No. 424 is a single-span iron truss bridge constructed on abutments of
    stone masonry. Located in Appoquinimink Hundred in New Castle County, the bridge carries
    Wiggins Mill Road (Road 446) over the Wiggins Mill Pond Outlet. The bridge's larger environment
    is a rural one of active farms and recent exurban residential development. The immediate setting is
    visually dominated by Wiggins Mill Pond and its surviving milldam, so that, with the historic bridge
    and its small road, the place conveys a strong and picturesque sense of its history as a former millseat
    dating back 200 years or more. A single house of recent construction is the sole building in view
    from the bridge.

    Thirty-four feet in length and fourteen feet, eight inches in width, the bridge carries a single lane of
    traffic. It is oriented running north-south so as to span the creek with a 15-degree skew. The
    abutments and flared wing walls are laid up in semi-coursed rubble masonry, with coping for the
    wing walls consisting of large cut-granite slabs. The somewhat awkward-seeming fit of this coping
    over the rubble wing walls suggests that the abutments and wing walls may survive from an earlier
    bridge, perhaps of the timber beam type. A plaque fitted in the coping of the southwest wing wall
    reads:

                                                 Rebuilt 1884
                                            J.T. Taylor L.T. Com

    The riveted iron pony truss is a three-panel example of the Warren type. The top and bottom chords
    as well as the diagonals are composed of double three-and-a-half-by-three-and-a-half-inch angles.
    The posts are three-and-a-half-by-three-and-a-half angles. Transverse floor beams, located at each
    panel point, extend beyond the truss to support angle "A" braces for the posts. The wooden deck,
    made up of four-by-eight planks, is carried by a pair of iron girders and doubled four-by-ten timber
    beams.

    HISTORY OF BRIDGE NO. 424

    State Bridge No. 424 was constructed in 1884 for the New Castle County government as a
    replacement for an earlier bridge. As suggested above, it is possible that the stone-masonry
    abutments and wing walls survive from the 1884 bridge's predecessor, built at some date from 1807
    onward. As of November 1996, Bridge No. 424 was slated for replacement with a modern structure.

    The vicinity of the bridge location began to be settled by Europeans in significant numbers circa
    1700. The production of wheat for export emerged as southern New Castle County's economic
    mainstay and remained so until around 1870. The area saw the rise of a briefly prosperous orchard
r   industry, especially for peach cultivation, after 1856, when the opening of the Delaware Railroad
    from Wilmington to Dover facilitated shipment of the perishable fruit. By the 1870s, however, the
    failure of local farmers to mount the intensive effort necessary for proper orchard cultivation and
                                                                          STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                                                          HAERNo.DE-48 (Page 3)

    harvest had led to a decline in this form of agriculture. The decline of orchard husbandry was
    matched by the demise of the region's winter wheat business in the face of rising competition from
    the spring wheat crops of the upper Midwest and northern Plains. The agricultural economy of
    southern New Castle County entered a long depressed period from which it slowly emerged in the
    course of the twentieth century. However, it never regained the burgeoning prosperity it experienced
    in the early and mid-nineteenth century (Herman 1986:2-8,124-27). The area's landscape remains
    largely dominated by general farming, including livestock raising and grain and truck crop
    cultivation.

    The nineteenth- and early twentieth-century history of the successive bridges at this location is
    linked with the history of the mill business that was conducted here. The mill was operating by
    1797, when the tax assessment for Appoguinimink Hundred listed William Williams with a mill,
    other buildings, and 444 acres of land. When the property was purchased by Joseph Whitby in 1813,
    the deed noted that a gristmill and a sawmill were present. Many owners succeeded Williams and
    Whitby, among whom Israel Allston Harman was notable for the duration of his tenure, 1871-1915.
    The frame gristmill building was still standing in 1938, when it was depicted on highway
    improvement plans. It is not known when the mill business closed or when the building came down.
    The fact that it is by George Wiggins's name that the location is presently known suggests that
    Wiggins (owner from 1915-1928) was the last operator of the mill (Hunter Research 1996:1-5).

    Access to and from the mill for its patrons, and for the export of its products, was evidently a
    primary concern for the petitioners who in 1803 besought the New Castle County Court of General
    Sessions to establish

           a public laid out road, to run from [another] public laid out road and from the easterly
           corner of Richard Reynolds's plantation to Williams's mill, and from thence to the
           main road leading from the Head of Sassafras [River] to Duck Creek [New Castle
           County Court of General Sessions (NCCCGS) 1794-1809:244].

    This road, now Wiggins Mill Road or Road 446, was confirmed by the court in 1807. The courses
    and distances of the road crossed "a branch of the Appoquinimink... near Williams's sawmill," but
    no mention is made in this Court of General Sessions return of construction of a bridge (NCCCGS
    1794-1809:414). Due to the possible heavy wagon traffic going to and from the mill, it may be that
    a bridge was built when the road was created or soon after. Bridge construction, however, was the
    province of the New Castle County Levy Court. Few of that court's bridge records from the
    nineteenth century have survived, so that the date of the first bridge at Wiggins Mill Pond is
    unknown.

    Construction of the present span took place in 1884, as dated by the in situ plaque and by the records
r   of the company that fabricated the truss, the Edge Moor Bridge Works. The Edge Moor Iron
    Company had been established in 1869 as an iron rolling mill refining iron for general purposes,
    located by the Delaware River on the northern edge of Wilmington. Edge Moor set
                                                                           STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                                                           HAER No. DE-48 (Page 4)

    up its bridge works in 1873. It emerged as one of the nation's more prominent manufacturers of iron
    bridges during the late nineteenth century, constructing spans over the East River in New York City,
    the Susquehanna River at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, and (for the Pennsylvania Railroad) the
    Schuylkill River in Philadelphia. Edge Moor built many Warren pony-truss bridges in New Castle
    County during this period, but in 1900, the company was taken over by J.P. Morgan's American
    Bridge Company. Within a few years, American shut down the bridge section of the Edge Moor
    works (HABS/HAER 1988).

    Iron truss bridges began to be built in the United States in numbers in the 1850s. The iron pony-
    truss bridge form was considered highly suitable during the latter half of the nineteenth century for
    relatively short crossings carrying secondary roads at rural locations such as Wiggins Mill Pond.
    The pony truss, in which the bottom chord embodies the main strength of the structure, could be
    adapted to a broad range of site conditions. The relative simplicity of its design, enabling its on-site
    assembly from prefabricated components, facilitated production, shipping, and final construction.
    The Warren truss was one of the earliest iron truss designs, patented in 1848 by the British engineers
    James Warren and Willoughby Monzoni. The original form of the Warren truss was that of a series
    of equilateral triangles (HABS/HAER 1988). Bridge No. 424 embodies a pony-truss modification
    in which the bottom chord of each triangular panel is longer than the diagonals.

    The replacement of Bridge No. 424 with a more modern structure was considered during the years
    1936-1938 and 1982-1983. In the 1930s, a proposed straightening of Wiggins Mill Road would
    have necessitated demolition and new construction, but for unknown reasons, the project was not
    undertaken (DelDOT Plan Files). In the 1980s, replacement of the bridge was studied due to its
    narrowness and concerns regarding its stability. It was considered possible that the bridge had
    deteriorated too much to ensure public safety, despite repairs to the timber deck in 1968 and to the
    stringers in 1977. However, intensive investigation in 1983 found Bridge No. 424 to be in
    adequately sound condition (DelDOT Maintenance Files).

    Bridge No. 424 is one of Delaware's six surviving metal truss bridges in service as highway bridges.
    In the 1920s, as many as 90 metal truss bridges were standing and in use in New Castle County alone
    (HABS/HAER 1988). The bridge possesses additional significance as a rare extant example of the
    Warren pony truss, one of the metal truss forms most commonly employed for small bridges in
    Delaware during the late nineteenth century. It is also important as a surviving small-scale structure
    manufactured by the Edge Moor Bridge Works, one of the nation's leading bridge-building firms
    during the period 1873-circa 1900.


    BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Delaware Department of Transportation [DelDOT]
r   various      Maintenance Files. File No. 1-424-446. On file at DelDOT Archives, Dover.
                                                                    STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                                                    HAERNo.DE-48 (Page 5)
    various       Plan Files. Contract No. 365. On file at DelDOT Archives, Dover.

    Herman, Bernard L.
    1986         Architecture and Rural Life in Central Delaware, 1700-1900. The University of
                 Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

    Historic American Buildings Survey/Historic American Engineering Record [HABS/HAER]
    1988          Delaware State Bridge No. 424, HABS/HAER Inventory Form. Prepared by P.A.C.
                  Spero & Company. On file at HABS/HAER, National Park Service, Washington,
                  D.C.

    Hunter Research
    1996          Phase I Archaeological Survey Investigations: Wiggins Mill Road Bridge
                  Replacement (Bridge #424), Appoquinimink Hundred, New Castle County,
                  Delaware. On file at the Delaware State Historic Preservation Office, Dover.

    New Castle County Records
    1903         New Castle County Bridge Book. On file at the Delaware State Archives, Dover.

    various       New Castle County Court of General Sessions. Road Dockets. On file at the
                  Delaware State Archives, Dover.

    P.A.C. Spero & Company
    1991          Delaware Historic Bridges: Survey and Evaluation. DelDOT Historic Architecture
                  and Engineering Series No. 89. Delaware Department of Transportation, Dover.

    Rea, Samuel, and Jacob Price
    1849          Map of New Castle County, Delaware. Smith & Wistar, Philadelphia. On file at the
                  Geography and Map Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.




r
                                   STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                   HAER No. DE-48 (Page 6)




                                                                1   MILE



                                                       1   KILOMETER



Location Map   SOURCE: USGS 7.5 Minute Quadrangle, Middletown, DE, 1993
                                 STATE BRIDGE NO. 424
                                 HAER No. DE-48 (Page 7)




Bridge Location Vicinity, 1849          Source: Rea and Price, 1849
