McFarland Gap Road, Culvert                            HAER No. GA-88-A
McFarland Gap Road
Chickamauga-Chattanoogi National Military Park Roads & Bridges          WftEfl
Ft. Oglethorpe        /
Walker County              '                                           ^fn




                        PHOTOGRAPHS
          WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE;; DATA




                    Historic American Engineering Record
                          National Park Service
                          . Southeast Region
                      Department of the Interior
                        Atlanta, Georgia 30303
                    HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                                                   /A-
                       MCFARLAND GAP ROAD, CULVERT     HAER No. GA-88-A




    Location:        McFarland Gap Road over an unnamed tributary in
                     Walker County, Georgia
                     U.S.G.S. Fort Ogletfrorpe, Georgia 7.5 Quadrangle,
                     Universal Transverse Mercator Coordinates:
                     Zone:       16
                     Easting:    657,680
                     Northing:   3,867,630
    Present Owner    United States Government
    Present Use:     Roadway crossing
    Significance:    While Chickamauga-Chattanooga National Military
                     Park exhibits historic significance in several
                     areas, the McFarland Gap Road Culvert represents
                     the earliest road building effort by park
                     officials as well as late nineteenth century road
                     building techniques.   Chickamauga-Chattanooga
                     National Military Park's other areas of
                     historical significance include conservation,
                     sculpture, and military.




I
                                          MCFARLAND GAP ROAD, CULVERT
                                          HAER No. GA-88-A    (Page 2)


    PART I.    PHYSICAL SETTING OF THE SITE AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO
               THE SURROUNDING ENVIRONMENT
               McFarland Gap Road culvert is a double box culvert
               located on McFarland Gap Road spanning an unnamed
               tributary in Walker County, Georgia. It is located in
               the northwest portion of Chickamauga-Chattanooga
               National Military Park.
    PART II.   HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF THE SITE
               While Chickamauga-Chattanooga National Military Park
               exhibits historic significance in several areas, the
               McFarland Gap Road Culvert represents the earliest road
               building effort by park officials as well as late
               nineteenth century road building techniques.
               Chickamauga-Chattanooga National Military Park's other
               areas of historical significance include conservation,
               sculpture, and military.
               The park is significant in the area of conservation
               since it is the first American battlefield whose
               preservation was authorized by Congress and where
               veterans of both armies actively participated in the
               park's creation and development.
               The park also is significant for its sculpture for its
               600 plus monuments which represent an impressive
               collection of sculpture and monumentation from the late
               nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The
               Chickamauga battlefield has 460 of these monuments
               ranging in size from the Wilder tower, over 80 feet
               tall with an interior stairway, and the Georgia
               Monument, 87 feet tall topped by a bronze figure, to
               the small stone markers and plaque tablets.
               In addition, the park is significant for its military
               association since the Chattanooga Campaign, which
               occurred during the fall of 1863 and resulted in an
               overall Union victory, was significant in that it
               exhibited some of the most remarkable military
               maneuvers and strategies during the Civil War. It also
               was a significant turning point in the war. With the
               Union's victory in Chattanooga, the control of all the
               railroads in the city was secured. Control of the
               railroads provided the Union army access to the Deep
               South, thereby laying the groundwork for Sherman's
               Atlanta Campaign, his March to the Sea and the ultimate




I
                                           MCFARLAND GAP ROAD, CULVERT
                                           HAER No. GA-88-A    (Page 3)
                fall of the Confederacy.
                The Battle of Chickamauga is significant in the overall
                context of the Chattanooga Campaign as being the first
                engagement. The battle itself, one of the last major
                Confederate victories, is significant since it involved
                a different kind of warfare than had been experienced
                on other battlefields of the Civil War. The densely
                forested terrain of the area impaired soldier
                visibility, resulting in close range and hand-to-hand
                fighting. This dense vegetation also impaired the
                chain of command causing troops to act without officer
                leadership and thus giving the Chickamauga battle the
                name of "soldier's battle." Military tactics employed
                during the battle, such as the breakdown of the large
                army into squads and platoons, and the use of
                breastworks and repeating rifles, became important in
                later wars.
    PART III.   HISTORY OF THE SITE
                The Chickamauga-Chattanooga National Military Park
                commemorates several Civil War battles fought in
                northwest Georgia and southeast Tennessee during
                September and November 1863. In 1888, a Veterans
                Officer's group, the Society of the Army of the
                Cumberland, proposed that both Union and Confederate
                veterans become involved in the project. The only
                other national battlefield preserved at this time was
                in Gettysburg and its monuments all commemorated Union
                efforts. A year late, the Joint Chickamauga Memorial
                Association organized to petition Congress. By 1890,
                the House Committee on Military Affairs approved the
                bill whose stated goal was to obtain approximately
                7,600 acres through condemnation procedures; approach
                roads were to be ceded to the Federal government by
                Georgia and Tennessee.   [The park owned all of
                McFarland Gap Road to McFarland Gap until the 1920s
                when the park disposed of approach roads.] Congress
                appropriated $125,000 to establish the park. Land
                acquisition began in 1891; by October 1892 all but
                1,000 acres had be acquired. In addition to land
                acquisition, during this time, park commissioners
                focused on the laying out and construction of roads.
                Roads present in 1863 were located and re-opened. An
                October 1891 plat of the park shows the proposed
                improvements to McFarland Gap Road. By 1900, most park
                roads had been completed.
                The concept of national historic parks and historic
                preservation began with the founding of the Chickamauga




I
                                          MCFARLAND GAP ROAD, CULVERT
                                          HAER No. GA-88-A    (Page 4)
               and Chattanooga National Military Park. Founders
               envisioned the park as a "theater for learning" and not
               as a recreational arena.
    PART IV.   PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
               The McFarland Gap Culvert is located on a two lane road
               in the northwestern portion of the park. The area
               continues to be wooded.
               The limestone faced double 5 by 3 box culvert displays
               two segmental arches clad in coursed ashlar stone.
               According to the park historian, Jim Ogden, the stone
               was quarried locally. Limestone was used extensively
               during the early road construction in the park with
               many culverts faced with it. The park also had
               drainage ditches lined in limestone. The drainage
               ditches existed until the early 1980s.




I
