2019 Woodland Avenue (Cottage)                    HABS No. IA-194
Des Moines
Polk County                                                HftfbS
Iowa                                                       10 vu ft
                                                           7/ - DE.£.fVIO 1
                                                           3o ...




                             PHOTOGRAPHS .

               WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND~DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                 Historic American Buildings Survey
                        National Park Service
                     Department of the Interior
                   Denver, Colorado 80225-0287
                        HISTORIC AMERICAN BUILDING SURVEY

                                2019 Woodland Avenue

                                 COTTAGE                                                RAES NO. IA-194

                                                                                     H11 ~s
                                                                                     ID vt' fl
Historic Name:      COTIAGE                                                          77 -·VL S.J~i
                                                                                      ~D --
Location:           2019 Woodland Avenue
                    Des Moines, IA 50312

                    T. E. Brown's 4th Addition
                    Lots 3 and4


Present Owner:      City of Des Moines, Iowa
                    400 East 1st Street
                    Des Moines, IA 50307


Present Occupant:   Vacant


Present Use:        Vacant


Statement of
Si~ificance:
                    Constructed circa 1897 and located near the Sherman Hill Historic
                    District, the architecture of this cottage is significant because it calls
                    attention to a vernacular design, eclectically influenced by Queen
                    Anne and Colonial Revival tastes, and stands as a transitional
                    example of a cottage influenced by these styles in Des Moines. The
                    modest size and architectural detailing of this building illustrates one
                    type of affordable housing being constructed in Des Moines during
                    the boom years of the late 1890s. The expectations of middle-class
                    homeowners had risen by this time, as is attested by the presence of
                    the full basement, which originally also probably included a furnace
                    for central heat. Facing south, this cottage breaks with other town
                    lot configurations as platted by the original proprietors of this and
                    other nearby city additions. As such, the property calls attention to
                    laissez faire town building and irregular real estate development as
                    practiced in Des Moines during the Victorian era The modest
                    architecture of this cottage also shows how land use affected the
                    quality of town lot improvements. In this instance, the presence of a
                    nearby cemetery depressed the improvement of lots on its fringes,
                    while lots located in neighboring Sherman Hill were more
                    extensively upbuilt


Prepared by:        William C. Page, Public Historian
                    Des Moines, IA
                                                                              COITAGE
                                                                              HABS No. IA-194
                                                                              Page3




                                           II
             ARCHITECTURAL INFORMATION

A.   GENERAL INFORMATION

     1. Architectural Merit and Interest

        This cottage is of architectural interest because of its proximity to the Sherman Hill
        Historic District and because it illustrates an affordable house constructed from
        vernacular design during the boom years in Des Moines' growth during the last two
        decades of the Nineteenth Century.


     2. Condition of Fabric

        Fair (to be demolished).


     3. Summary Description

        This is a frame, single-family dwelling, presently clad with cover-up siding. The
        resource contains a 1-story main house, including a rear wing, whose footprint measures
        approximately 28' x 32', and an enclosed rear porch, measuring approximately 20' x 5'.


B.   DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF EXTERIOR

     1. Foundation

        Brick foundation.
        Footing materials unknown.
        Foundation highly exposed on west elevation due to fall in grade of lot.


     2. Wall Construction

        Asbestos-cement siding.


     3. Structural Systems

        Balloon wood frame construction.
                                                                               CaITAGE
                                                                               HABS No. IA-194
                                                                               Page4

     4. Porches. Stoops. Etc.·

          Enclosed front porch.
          Enclosed rear porch.


     5.   Qpenin~s. Doorways. and Windows

          Front doorway on east elevation.
          Wood panel front door with 6 pane window.

          Back doorway on north elevation.
          Back door with one glass panel and three horizontal wood panels.

          Louvered openings in attic on west, south, and east gable ends for ventilation.


     6. RQQf
          Cross-gable roof over main house.
          Hip roof over rear wing.
          Shed roof over front porch and rear porch.

          All roofs covered with asphalt shingles.

          Medium width eaves surrounding main house and back porch.

          No cornices.

          No dormers, cupolas, or towers.


     7. Chimneys

          One interior brick chimney located on ridge of front gable about 14 feet from south
          elevation, parged with cement.


C.   DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF INTERIOR

     1. Floor Plans

          5 rooms on Floor 1 (living room, dining room, 2 bedrooms, kitchen, plus bath and
                entryhall. Kitchen is modernized).
          Archway between living room and dining room.
          Full basement.


     2. Stairways

          Straight, kitchen to basement.
                                                                          COITAGE
                                                                          HABS No. IA-194
                                                                          Page 5 .

 3.   Floorin~

      Hardwood floorboards on Floor 1, now carpeted.
      Concrete floor in basement.


 4. Wall and Ceilin~ Finishes

      Plaster finish on Floor 1 walls.
      Drop ceilings.
      Basement unfinished.


 5. Doorways. Doors. and Windows

      Modern, wooden, hollow core doors.
      3-part fenestration in living room, large central pane flanked by 1/1 double hung sash
            windows.


 6. Interior Trim

      Mop board.
      Cove molding cornice.


7. Harciware

      Modem, brass door and window hardware.


 8. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment

      Warm air, base heating.
      Modem, metal registers.


9.    Plumbin~

      Standard, modem fixtures.


10. Fir<aJlace

      Fireplace in living room.
      No surrounds or mantel.
      Bricked-up flue.
                                                                           COITAGE
                                                                           HABS No. IA-194
                                                                           Page6

D.   SITE AND SURROUNDINGS

     1. Orientation and General Settin~

          Comer lot measures 40' on Woodland Avenue and 120' on Martin Luther King Jr.
               Parkway).
          Front facade faces south.
          High topography.
          Concrete sidewalks on south and west
          Paved streets with curb and gutters.


     2. Historic Landscape Desi~

          Poured concrete retaining wall with beveled crown between sidewalk and yard on south
               and west elevations.
          Poured concrete steps and pedestrian walk from sidewalk to front door.
          Semi-mature Maple tree in backyard.
          Chainlink fence along east property line.
          Paved alley along north property line.
          House to east at 2017 Woodland Avenue nonextant.
          Asphalt vehicular drive from alley to about 15' from rear elevation of house.
          Poured concrete steps to back door.
          poured concrete pedestrian walk on west and south.


     3.   Outbuildin~s

          None.
                                                                                      Co'ITAGE
                                                                                      HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                      Page 7




                                          III
                        HISTORICAL CONTEXT

A.    SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANCE

Built circa 1897, the cottage at 2019 Woodland Avenue calls attention, as a good but not
outstanding example, to several historic qualities in Des Moines during the Victorian
period. Although located outside the boundaries of the nearby Sherman Hill Historic
District (listed on the National Register of Historic Places and locally designated as an
historic district), this cottage also contributes to that district because of these qualities of
significance.

This chapter explicates this significance by evaluating the cottage within the following
historic contexts:

                         Town Building in Des Moines: A Legacy of Laissez Faire
                         Town Building in Des Moines: Land Use
                         Architecture of Affordable Housing in Victorian Des Moines

Town building addresses several of the most important aspects of Des Moines' history as a
community. During the latter half of the Nineteenth Century, the economic and social
principles of laissez-faire underlay most building practices in Des Moines and strongly
affected the course of the city's upbuilding and improvement.

Patterns of land use also affected this development. In spite of the effects of laissez-faire, a
number of traditional patterns of land use were observed in Des Moines. These, and a
series of new patterns of land use, imparted a certain feeling of uniformity to town building
in the city.

During the latter years of the Victorian period, affordable housing emerged as a new
property type, replete with comforts previously restricted to the affluent. Although the
large homes of the Victorian period have captured popular imagination, this period also saw
the construction of cottages for the middle, lower-middle, and lower classes. The number
of these cottages reached an unprecedented extent during the period.


B.    TOWN BUILDING IN DES MOINES: A LEGACY OF LAISSEZ-FAIRE

Introduction

Nineteenth Century Des Moines was characterized by a patchwork quality of urban design.
Throughout that period, the economic and political tenets of laissez-faire spurred the
growth of the city. Unrestricted by municipal ordinances, zoning laws, building codes, or
                                                                                             COTIAGE
                                                                                             HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                             Page 8

other limits on private initiative, real estate interests subdivided ever smaller tracts of land
and developed them for residential purposes, often relying exclusively on economic
dictates. As the city's population boomed during the 1880s and 1890s, frenzied real estate
speculation swept Des Moines. Hundreds of new plats and thousands of new residential
housing units were laid out and constructed. As a general rule, little regard was given to
good urban planning.

The acreage of the plats, for example, varied widely. Some large tracts were laid out In
many other instances, the proprietors of large tracts subdivided and sold them to other
speculators, who in tum further subdivided them. Parcelization of land resulted.

Within the plats, the size of lots also varied. Some plats included uniform and rather large
lots, such as Thompson's Subdivision, located adjacent to West 9th Street (Page and
Walroth:Map following E-96). In contrast, the lot sizes in North Park, an area immediately
to the south of Thompson's Subdivision, were both narrower and less deep. The size of
town lots in Brown's 4th Addition varied extensively.

This city's street network also illustrates the results of laissez-faire practices. Each plat
reserved certain areas for streets and alleys, but little attention was paid to conformity.
Two adjacent plats might provide traffic corridors that did not meet or varied in width.
North Street (now University Avenue) provides a good example. Not until the Twentieth
Century was this major east-west artery rationalized into a thoroughfare. By the 1920s, the
public recognized the bitter fruits of unregulated development Hired by the City of Des
Moines to study the problem and recommend solutions, Harland Bartholomew, urban
planner of St. Louis, Missouri, reported:


                Altogether the subdividers of land have thus far platted approximately
                1100 "additions" in Des Moines. These operations in actuality are city
                planning. When the owner of an acreage tract cuts it up into lots and
                streets he is engaged in a small way in the highly important work of
                fixing the ultimate character of the city. What he does may be either an
                advantage or a disadvantage in later years. Under such circumstances it
                is entirely reasonable to urge that his activities be brought within the
                purview of municipal authorities. If Des Moines some time ago had
                appreciated the full significance of the operations of land subdividers it
                might have reduced the 1486 jogs and dead ends which appear in its
                streets and might also have made their widths more nearly proportionate
                to their importance. (Harland Bartholomew:31.)


T. E. Brown's 4th Addition

T. E. Brown's 4th Addition provides one example among many of laissez-faire urban
growth in Des Moines. Platted in 1882 <Title Transfer Book C-3:264) and consisting of
some five acres, this addition calls attention to the city's lack of uniform streets and later
attempts to rationalize them. The plat also illustrates how laissez-faire development could
benefit the potential homeowner.

Following his purchase of a large portion of the Pursley Farms Estate, an early farm on
Des Moines' near West Side, Brown proceeded to develop and improve this property for
investment and resale. First he platted Brown's Addition, "the first regularly platted
addition to the city." Now known as Shennan Hill:
                                                                                        CorrAGE
                                                                                        HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                        Page9

                it comprised that part of the city embraced between Sixteenth and
                Twenty-first streets, and Pleasant and Crocker streets. He graded the
                streets and in general beautified the property, holding out such
                inducements that it became, as it remains, one of the most attractive
                portions of the entire city. (Iowa State Register:1891a.)


Brown subsequently developed other portions of the Pursley Estate.

Brown's 4th Addition, the subject of this present study, was platted in 1882. Located at
the southwest corner of the Pursley Estate, this addition comprised only a small portion of
Brown's entire holdings in the area. This, the relatively late date of its platting, and its
location adjacent to Woodland Cemetery, suggest the land lacked the appeal of Brown's
other nearby property. These factors also suggest that Brown platted his 4th Addition only
after the preferred additions had established the neighborhood as a desirable one.

Tallmadge E. Brown (1830-1891) was born in New York State, where he subsequently
studied law. He came to Des Moines in 1854 and established a law practice. Brown
became associated with J.C. Savery, James Callanan, and other entrepreneurs, who
secured great tracts of swamp land in Iowa, then being transferred by the state to private
ownership. The association held this real estate, later profiting from its resale. In addition
to developing and managing his large land-holdings, Brown later became involved in the
paving movement, owning a company that was involved in street improvement projects as
far away from Des Moines as Memphis, Tennessee (Ibid.). At his death, Brown "was
probably the largest owner of city lots in the city" (Ibid.).

The street names in Brown's 4th Addition--Center Street, Pleasant Street, and 21st Street--
conform to names of the surrounding street network. Street widths in Brown's 4th,
however, were laid out in an internally inconsistent design. For example, 21st Street
between Woodland Avenue and Pleasant Street measured 63 feet in width. The same street
between Pleasant and Center Streets measured 32.5 feet in width. This design provided
Brown with additional land to sell. It also injected irregularity into town building in Des
Moines. (It should be noted that the plat immediately south of Brown's 4th also provided
only 33 feet for 21st Street, but not in line with the 32.5 foot corridor above Pleasant
Street!) The irregularity of these streets came to the fore during agitation for construction
of a cross-town traffic way foilowing World War I (see Figure 6).

The configuration of town lots in Brown's 4th Addition also broke with the pattern he had
previously established in his 2nd and 3rd Additions, located immediately to the east These
additions featured lots of equal size, laid out in a regularly rectilinear design, with lots
oriented either to the east or west. In contrast, Brown's 4th Addition contains a random
pattern of lot sizes, lot orientations, and street widths, as discussed above (see Figure 3).

The irregularity of Brown's 4th Addition allowed for a series of smaller town lots than had
been available in his previous additions. Perhaps Brown's intention was to encourage the
potential homeowner of modest financial capability. Intended or not, this was its effect.
                                                                               COTIAGE
                                                                               HABS No. IA-194
                                                                               Page 10

C.    TOWN Burr.DING IN DES MOINES: LAND USE

Introduction

Although laissez-faire practices resulted in unrestricted development, some traditional
patterns of land use continued to obtain authority in Des Moines during the Nineteenth and
early Twentieth Centuries. These widely respected principles of town building imposed a
certain uniformity on the city. For example, the American grid system of streets and lots
was almost universally followed. Lots in almost all the plats were laid out in rectilinear
configurations.

Other traditional patterns of residential land use also held force. Low-lying areas, initially
shunned as inappropriate for habitation because of drainage, structural, and health
problems, became more attractive for development as the choice high-lying locations close
to the city were improved. (Still, these low-lying areas usually were never improved with
the same quality of housing stock as at the preferred locations.)

New patterns of land use also developed in Des Moines during the period. Cemeteries,
which had attracted wide public attention in the mid-Nineteenth Century as parklands,
became later in the century subject to public debate, as officials spoke out against their
threats to health. This debate, coupled with their gruesome purpose, fostered a predilection
against residential development on the fringes of these institutions.

The growth of transportation played another important role in influencing land use. Three
aspects are apparent. The rise of streetcars and public transportation opened vast new
sections of the city for residential development. Grand boulevards and the traffic
thoroughfares appealed to emerging Victorian social customs and economic capabilities
because they showcased conspicuous consumption and usually enjoyed the convenience of
the first-to-be-paved streets. Grand Avenue in Des Moines became a preferred residential
corridor for these reasons, as well as East 9th Street and West 9th Street, to name a few
others. In contrast, those streets which ran higgledy-piggledy from plat to plat lacked such
appeal and did not attract the same quality of improvements. In the city's near westside,
20th Street and 21st Street between Woodland Avenue and Center Street provide good
examples.


Cemeteries and Land Use

Four cemeteries are located adjacent to one another on Des Moines' near westside--
Woodland Cemetery, St Ambrose Catholic Cemetery, Odd Fellows Cemetery, and Jewish
(or Emanuel) Cemetery. Significant in terms of acreage and function, the presence of these
cemeteries profoundly affected the evolution of land use in the surrounding sections of the
city.

The Victorians looked upon death as an important aspect of reality. Consequently, they
respected symbols, ceremonies, reminders, and tokens of mortality. Because cemeteries
formed such large and imposing monuments to death, they assumed great significance in
the Nineteenth Century. Not only did they serve the practical function as burial grounds,
by mid-century they had become associated with parks and recreation. Indeed, in many
American cities, Des Moines included, the public cemetery often provided the only large
parkland space in the urban environment
                                                                                         CarrAGE
                                                                                         HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                         Page 11

A few cemeteries in America achieved national attention and influenced the evolution of the
landscape architecture of cemeteries across the country. Among them, Greenwood
Cemetery in Brooklyn, Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston, and Graceland Cemetery in
Chicago stand out in importance. All across the settled regions of the country, cemeteries
served as parks, and city residents visited them for leisure and moral education--to stroll,
enjoy the natural world, and perhaps pay respect to deceased family and friends.

Less is known at present about cemeteries and their significance in Des Moines, although
references by name occur in local newspapers, citing Mount Auburn and Greenwood
Cemeteries as models (Iowa State Register:1889a).

Woodland Cemetery, consisting of forty acres, was established as a public bwi.al ground
by the City of Des Moines and laid out in 1859. This cemetery embraced Odd Fellows'
Cemetery, which had been established in 1858. St. Ambrose Catholic Cemetery,
comprising twelve acres, was laid out in 1866. Consisting of two acres, Jewish (or
Emanuel) Cemetery was established in 1871, although it was not laid out until 1880 (Iowa
State Register:1880).
Originally located on the outskirts of the community, the combined presence of these large
tracts of publicly and privately owned property overshadowed the development of the
surrounding land. As this land was subdivided into plats and built up, and, as the number
of burials mounted, this influence increased. At first, the cemeteries had been viewed as
parklands, leisure grounds, and public amenities. By the end of the Nineteenth Century,
they had became the subject of public agitation. Health professionals voiced concern about
the contagion of disease. Investment interests supported a plan to disinter the burials and
relocate them to new cemetery sites (possibly because they coveted the property for real
estate development). Each of these issues contributed to the public debate.
Already in the 1880s, local newspapers discussed health concerns regarding cemeteries.
The Iowa State Register, for example, published a long article on the topic, citing potential
pollution of the city's water supply from the creek which drained Woodland Cemetery
(Iowa State Register:1889c).
In the 1890s, diphtheria became a major concern for Des Moines. In May of 1889, only
one death from this disease had been reported (Iowa State Register: 1889b). Between
October 1, 1890, and October 1, 1891, in contrast, 100 deaths were attributed to the
disease (Iowa State Register: 1891c). A contemporary newspaper account reported one
method city residents employed to combat the spread of this disease:

               A sad and touching sight was witnessed on Locust street, between First
               and Second streets, yesterday. A funeral procession crossed the bridge,
               coming from the east, and stopped when opposite the German Lutheran
               church. Just as the hearse halted, a band of forty children came out of
               the church and standing on the steps sang three verses of a familiar
               Sunday-school hymn. No explanation was needed, but passers-by could
               read the sad story at a glance. A child from the Sunday-school had been
               taken away by the dread diphtheria. No public service in the church
               could be held. But the former playmates and associates gathered on the
               church steps, to sing a hymn of sympathy and comfort, as the broken
               hearted mourners passed on their sad journey to the cemetery. (Iowa
               State Register:1889d.)
                                                                                             CorrAGE
                                                                                             HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                             Page 12

In addition to quarantine, health officials lobbied for other measures to combat the disease.
The need and location for a new cemetery were widely debated (Iowa State Register:1891d)
and the subject of water pollution from burial grounds discussed (Iowa State
Register: 1889e).
In the end, the city purchased new land to the northwest, established Glendale Cemetery
there, and retained Woodland. Cemetery. As a result, Woodland and its sister cemeteries
continued to exert influence on the evolution of land use in the surrounding neighborhoods.
Residential development skirted the cemeteries on all four sides, yet remained
overshadowed by the character of the cemeteries' purpose. The cemeteries formed
obstacles to cross-town transportation. Finally, the presence of these cemeteries tended to
separate Des Moines' near West Side from that section of the city farther to the west


Transportation

Transportation patterns have exerted profound effects on land use in Des Moines.
Numerous dogleg and dead-end streets discouraged quality improvements in the
neighborhoods adjacent to them. For another example, the presence of a thoroughfare for
motorized vehicles encouraged redevelopment of residential properties along its fringes to
ever higher uses.

By the early Twentieth Century, Des Moines streets had become a maze, yet an increasing
number of cars and trucks spurred the need for cross-town roads to speed traffic . The
historical implications of laissez-faire development became particularly significant
following World War I, when Des Moines sought to improve north-south traffic arteries
through the construction of what was to become Harding Road.

Now named Martin Luther King Jr. Parkway (the street has been renamed several times,
Warren Street, G Street, 21st Street, as well as Harding Road), this street and the city plats
in this area illustrate irregular planning and its consequences for city streets. As Figure 6
shows, 21st Street lacked a standard width. This street also came to an end at Center
Street. Through traffic was required to tum into Center Street before proceeding again
north, a traffic pattern still true today. Construction of Harding Road reconfigured the plats
fronting 20th Street and 21st Streets between Woodland and Cottage Grove Avenues and
these changes illustrate the effects of transportation on land use.

Prior to the 1930s, north-south traffic from Des Moines' northwest side relied on Cottage
Grove Avenue and a series of north-south streets to access the downtown. Formerly
known as the Military Road or the road to Fort Dodge, Cottage Grove historically provided
a popular northwest artery in and out of the city, but the haphazard configuration of plats
and traffic usage in Des Moines manifested no particular street to serve as its north-south
link to the downtown. Keosauqua Way was one attempt to solve this problem. Another
attempt, sponsored by the Des Moines Realtors Bureau in 1919, proposed a new traffic
way from Grand Avenue to Cottage Grove.


                 The proposition involves the widening of a part of Twenty-first street, a
                 new way being cut through from Twenty-first to Twentieth street, and
                 the widening of the last street until it reached Cottage Grove avenue.
                 Most of the proposed way is now paved, but probably two-thirds of it
                 is brick in bad condition: and part is not wide enough for a standard
                 street (Des Moines Register:l919a.)
                                                                              COTI'AGE
                                                                              HABS No. IA-194
                                                                              Page 13


A plan of this proposed route was published at the same time (see Figure 6). Although
faced with difficult constraints of property ownership and street configurations, city
planners opted to adopt this plan. It involved a bend in Harding Road at its intersection
with Center Street, effectively joining 20th Street and 21st Street into this new north-south
route. After long discussion, planning, and federal commitment, this new traffic way was
built in 1935 Oournal of City Council: 1199).

The construction of Harding Road provided Des Moines with a new and needed cross-
town traffic way. The road's success can be measured by increased traffic on this road
over the years and recent plans to ~xpand the route, now known as Martin Luther King Jr.
Parkway, into a bypass to skirt downtown Des Moines and connect with the Des Moines
Freeway. While this progress benefited the entire community, it depressed the adjacent
residential neighborhood. The traffic way injected a barrier between dwellings east and
west of it in Kuhn's Addition and Leyner's Plat The dwellings on the West Side suffered
the most because they were isolated between the traffic way and cemeteries. In this sense,
Harding Road further compounded the irregularity of this irregular section of Des Moines.
Finally, Harding Road introduced new levels of noise and vehicle emissions into these and
other adjacent plats, such as Brown's 4th Addition.


D.    ARCHI1ECTURE OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN VICTORIAN DES MOINES

Introduction

This and a series of associated Historic American Building Survey recordations (HABS
Nos~ IA-190, IA-191, IA-192, IA-193, and IA-195) provide opportunities to analyze and
evaluate, in intensive fashion, several examples of affordable housing constructed in Des
Moines during the 1890s and the first decade of the Twentieth Century. These recordations
serve to supplement the findings of a previous architectural survey, which identified certain
design subtypes within the Queen Anne architectural resources of the city.

Although the large homes of the Victorian period have captured popular imagination in
America during the last decade, the late Nineteenth Century also saw the construction of
numerous cottages for the middle, lower-middle, and lower classes. Because these modest
dwellings lack the size, architectural detailing, and complexity of larger dwellings, they
have received less scholarly attention. They are also difficult to evaluate because archival
information about them is limited. Nonetheless, affordable housing emerged during the
late Nineteenth Century as an important property type in Des Moines and attracted the
attention not only of the potential homeowners, but also real estate investors. The cottage
provided an ideal property type for both purposes.

The preparation of this historical context was aided by a study prepared by William C. Page
and Joanne R. Walroth, "Towards a Greater Des Moines: Early Suburbanization and
Development, circa 1880-circa 1920," a reconnaissance survey of certain suburban
neighborhoods in Des Moines during the late Victorian period. This 1992 study identified
style and function as two important architectural influences prevalent in the city during that
period. In terms of style, Queen Anne and Colonial Revival tastes held sway over local
design. In addition to these stylistic changes, residential design also evolved according to
its function. For example, Page and Walroth identified the double house as a new property
type because it responded to the need for rental property.
                                                                                       CorrAGE
                                                                                       HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                       Page 14

This present HABS recordation expands the reference points of the 1992 study by
identifying affordable housing as another architectural influence over the evolution of
residential design during the period. As home ownership came within reach of an
increasing number of residents, the demand for affordable housing stimulated new
architectural designs. The cottage provided one good solution and was adapted to both
owner-occupied and rental purposes.


Transitional Cotta~e

Constructed circa 1897, this cottage at 2019 Woodland Avenue exhibits several aspects of
vernacular styling. The ground plan and the roof design are most notable in this regard.
While the ground plan relates to Queen Anne influences, the roof configuration exhibits
design elements more often employed by the Colonial Revival taste. As such, this cottage
provides a transitional example of vernacular design. This section of the report analyzes
these architectural influences and places the resource in historical context among other
dwellings built in the city during the same period.

"Towards a Greater Des Moines" identified the following five categories of Queen Anne
~~gn:                                                               .


                                 Standard Queen Anne House
                                 Queen Anne Canted Bay House
                                 Queen Anne House
                                 Queen Anne Cottage
                                 Queen Anne Gable-on-Hip House


These categories differentiated architectural designs according to their size (I-story, 1.5-
stories, and 2- or 2.5 stories) and according to their roof configurations. Generally
speaking, the smaller the house in terms of size, the more restrained its architectural
detailing.

The report concluded that the


                Queen Anne cottage constitutes an important, small-scale subtype,
                notable for its charming demeanor. These T-shaped buildings contain
                I-story, or 1.5-stories, with the long axis forming the facade and
                covered with a gable end roof. This subtype appears in North Des
                Moines and Capital Park in particular. Although this type is usually
                wood frame in construction, a few brick examples exist." (Page and
                Walroth:I, E-59.)


The floor plan of the cottage at 2019 Woodland Avenue relates to this Queen Anne cottage
subtype. Laid out in a "T" shape, this floor plan features the living room in the space
covered by the front-gable roof. Although the front entry porch has been enclosed, the
presence of a porch within an ell of the floor plan is another feature of the Queen Anne
cottage.

The roof design of the cottage consists of a half cross-gable roof of moderately steep pitch.
The front-gable roof covers the house from its south elevation midway over its main block.
                                                                                           ColTAGE
                                                                                           HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                           Page 15

This roof intersects a side-gable roof, forming a half cross-gable configuration. A hip roof
covers the rear wing of the building. The front porch is covered with an extension of the
front-gable. In this regard, this resource's roof configuration calls attention to the influence
of Colonial Revival styling. The 1990 study "Towards a Greater Des Moines" identified
the Cross Gable as one subtype within the Colonial Revival resources in the city.


                The cross gable is one of the most complex residential designs. These
                houses feature side gables with an intersecting facade gable. The side
                gables can be either straight or gambrel or combinations. Other
                architectural elements, such as a tower, can also be included. (Page and
                Walroth:I, E-60.)      .


The porch roof of this house calls further attention to Colonial Revival influences in Des
Moines. One conceit employed by this style inset the front porch under the main roof. For
example, the 1990 report singled out houses at 1526 4th Street and 1464 4th Street as
illustrations (Ibid., I, E-60). The E. A. Temple House at 1330 West 9th Street, a design of
Hallet and Rawson, is a particularly fine example. In this regard, the house at 2019
Woodland Avenue calls attention to the propensity for inset porches. As is evident from
other studies in this series (HABS Nos. IA-193 and IA-191), houses constructed under
Queen Anne influence are more likely to cover the front porch with a shed roof separate
from that of the main block.

Finally, the employment of the hip roof is more prevalent in Colonial Revival than in Queen
Anne taste in Des Moines. George E. Hallett and Oliver 0. Smith, architects of Des
Moines, frequently employed such roof designs, and several drawings of theirs have been
documented (lbid.:I, following E-64). The hip roof generally imparts an organic quality to
a building because the planes of its roof surround the volume. By comparison, the gable
roof tends to call dramatic attention to the elevation it surmounts, and houses erected under
Queen Anne influence are more likely to cover rear wings with gable roofs. This can be
seen in the HABS resources cited above.

It should also be noted that this discussion has addressed only the roof of the original
building. The enclosed porch at the rear, covered with a shed roof, for example, is a later
addition and plays no role in the architectural concept of the building.

The construction date of this cottage, circa 1897, was determined stylistic influences. City
directory records are confusing for this property because the house number is not
consistent. Title transfers in the Polk County Recorder's Office did not clarify this matter.
Finally, the construction date, "1880 +/-,"shown in the records of the Des Moines City
Assessor's Office was of little help. This date is too early stylistically for a cottage in Des
Moines with a rear wing covered with the type of hip roof it possesses.


The Afforciable Cottalit<

The cottage evolved during the late Nineteenth Century in Des Moines as a new type of
residential dwelling. Formerly the word "cottage" had euphemistically described a wide
range of suburban dwellings. In 1887, for example, Palliser, Palliser, and Company,
architects of New York City, published a pattern book illustrating dozens of "cottage"
designs, which, in fact, were intended for the substantial, upper-middle class pocketbook.
                                                                                           Co'ITAGE
                                                                                           HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                           Page 16

Semantics notwithstanding, the economic prosperity of the 1880s and 1890s stimulated
construction of many new "cottages" in Des Moines. As the Iowa State Register reported:


                    The homes now being built are of the most modern and ornate style of
                    architecture and are much more roomy and extensive than formerly.
                  · Both the mansion and small, unpretentious cottage of to-day are not
                    considered complete without the furnace, and hardwood finish, once
                    luxuries only accessible to the rich. (Iowa State Register.1889a.)


In this regard, it appears that life styles of affluent and modest householders in Des Moines
narrowed during the late Nineteenth Century as more and more homes featured modern
conveniences and amenities.

The "small, unpretentious" cottage at 2019 Woodland Avenue calls attention to one
example of such an affordable house. Although its original woodwork is nonextant, its full
basement could easily have housed a furnace to provide the house with central heat (It
should be noted that the nature of this original heating system cannot be documented and
the fireplace, which presently is situated in the living room, may or may not be original to
the building.)




            · .. ---·..
                                                                          Co1TAGE
                                                                          HABS No. IA-194
                                                                          Page 17




                                    IV
              SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A.   ORIGINAL ARCHITEC1URAL DRAWINGS

     No original architectural drawings, plans, or elevations were found for this
     building.                                                                ·


B.   HISTORIC IMAGES

     No historic images of this property were discovered.


C.   INTERVIEWS

     Gerald A. Jewett with William C. Page, July 18, 1994. Jewett shared
     information about his family and the development of the Jewett Lumber
     Company. He also provided access to the company's file of corporatior:i
     history.

     John P. Zeller with William C. Page, at numerous times in 1994. Zeller
     shared his extensive knowledge about the history and development of Des
     Moines and answered specific questions about it


D.   BIBLIOGRAPHY

     1.     Primary and Unpublished Sources
            Peoples Abstract Company
            No date. Abstract of Title.

            Bartholomew, Harland
            No date. "A preliminary Major Street Plan for Des Moines,
                   Iowa." Prepared for Des Moines Zoning Commission, circa
                   1925.

            Des Moines City Directories
            1861, 1866, 1869, 1871-72, 1873-74, 1892, 1900, 1908.

            Journal of [Des Moines] City Council
            1935 "Resolution No. 2655." October 10.
                                                            COTIAGE
                                                            HABS No. IA-194
                                                            Page 18

     Plat Book A
     Polk County Recorder's Office.

     Plat Book C
     Polk County Recorder's Office.

     Plat Book D
     Polk County Recorder's Office.

     Title Transfer Book C-3.
     Polk County Recorder's Office.

     U.S. Census
     1900

     Dixon, J. M., editor
     1876 Centennial History of Polk County. Iowa. Des Moines.


2.   Secondary and Published Sources
     Baker, John Milnes
     1994 American House Styles: A Concise Guicie. W.W. Norton
            & Company, New York.           ·

     Gowans, Alan
     1992 Styles and Types of Nortb American Architecture. Icon
          Editions, New York.

     McAlester, Virginia and Lee
     1984 A Field Guide to American Houses. Alfred A. Knopf, New
           York.

     Page, William C., and Joanne R. Walroth
     1992 "Towards a Greater Des Moines: Early Suburbanization and
            Development, circa 1880 - circa 1920." Des Moines Plan
            and Zoning Department, River Bend Neighborhood
            Association, and State Historical Society of Iowa, Des
            Moines.

     Phillips, Steven J.
     1992 Old House Dictionazy. The Preservation Press,
             Washington, DC.

     U. S. Department of the Interior
     No date Manual for Editin~ HABS/HAER Documentation.
            National Park Service.
                                                                     CorrAGE
                                                                     HABS No. IA-194
                                                                     Page 19

3.   Newspapers
     Iowa State Register
     1878a "Dr. Turner proposes to lay his street car track to Nineteenth
           street..." June 28.

     Iowa State Register
     1878b "University Place Items." June 18.

     Iowa State Register
     1880   "Our bretheren [sic] of the Jewish faith ... " July 7.

     Iowa State Register
     1881   "The New Cemetery." August 23.

     Iowa State Register
     1888   "The Year 1888."
     Iowa State Register
     1889a "Building Up Des Moines." September 22.

     Iowa State Register
     1889b "Dr. Matthews has prepared this summary" [mortality rates].
           June 15.

     Iowa State Register
     1889c "Cemetery Danger." November 24.


     Iowa State Register
     1889d "A Sad and touching sight. .. " [diphtheria]. November 28.

     Iowa State Register
     1889e "Water Pollution." December 8.

     Iowa State Register
     1890a "Des Moines in 1890." January 26.

     Iowa State Register
     1890b "Real Estate Talk." April 12.

     Iowa State Register
     1891a "The Death of T. E. Brown." May 7.

     Iowa State Register
     1891b "The Funeral of T. E. Brown." May 10.

     Iowa State Register
     1891c "Des Moines' Death Rate." October 17.

     Iowa State Register
     1891d "The Cemetery Question." November 7.
                                                                              COTIAGE
                                                                              HABS No. IA-194
                                                                              Page 20

               Iowa State Register
               1895a "Death of Mr. Jacob Kuhn." July 2.

               Iowa State Register
               1895b "Funeral of Joseph [sic] Kuhn." July 5.

               Iowa State Register
               1902    "D.R. Ewing Dead." January 26.

               Des Moines Tribune
               1913    "Death of a Pioneer/George P. Leyner." May 21.

               Des Moines Register and Leader
               1913    "Pioneer Des Moines Business Man Dead." May 21.

               Des Moines Register
               1919a "New Traffic Highway proposed." October 20.

               Des Moines Register
               1919b "Realtors propose New Traffic Way North From Grand."
                     October 20.

               Des Moines Register
               1935    "Shovels, Tractors, Mixers Grind on Street Project."
                       October 12.


       4.      Maps
               Huebinger, M.
               1909 Map of the City of Des Moines, Iowa.

               Sanborn Map Company
               1901 Map of Des Moines, Iowa. New York.

               Sanborn Map Company
               1920 Map of Des Moines, Iowa. New York.

               Sanborn Map Comany
               1920-1943
                       Map of Des Moines, Iowa. New York.

E.     LIKELY SOURCES NOT YET INVESTIGATED

       As further scholarly work investigates the "house to rent," this information
       can be used to reevaluate this aspect of affordable housing in Des Moines.


F.     SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

The following supplemental material is added here to outline the methodology used in this
report. Because of the scarcity of good historical accounts of Des Moines, particularly its
                                                                                    CoTrAGE
                                                                                    HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                    Page 21

architectural development, the use of primary materials was mandated In an effort to
conduct a systematic, yet realistic, search within the time constraints imposed by the
contract deadline, a few variables were defined. The search then focused on finding the
following facts:


                     Year of the resource's construction.
                     Name of the first owner.
                     First owner's occupation.
                     Detennination whether the property was owner occupied and/or a rental.


Primary research was conducted using newspapers, federal census records, Des Moines
city directories, and Sanborn fire insurance maps. Each of these sources has its own·
limitations. The search was further complicated because the address of the resource has
changed several times due to city renumbering and renaming of the street.

Although numerous newspapers were consulted, no direct citation was found to document
the year of construction of the resource. The modest size of this house, the low level of its
architectural detailiiig, and the quantity of similar houses being constructed in Des Moines
during the late Victorian period made it unlikely that this house was the subject of
newspaper attention.

The Federal census of 1880 was consulted for data concerning Ward 4 in Des Moines.
This census listed individuals by name. The researcher noted every address whose location
was near the study area. None of these addresses related to the resource under study.

The results of this research were then checked against the Des Moines City Directory of
1882. This directory lists individual's dwellings in an various ways, often mentioning
only an area of the city. From this sketchy data, the researcher determined that none of the
1880 census names appeared in Kuhn's Addition or Leyner's Plat, although this
determination is imprecise. Analysis of this research concluded, therefore, that no
residents were living in either Kuhn's Plat or Leyner's Addition in the summer of 1880.

The Federal census of 1900 was then consulted. This enumeration has addresses for
individuals, and it also shows whether the occupant of the property is an owner or renter.

The Des Moines City Directory of 1908 was then consulted. This is the first city directory
that contains a street-by-street index with addresses the same as the homes retain today.

The earliest Sanborn fire insurance map for the neighborhood shows the neighborhood in
1901. Two other Sanborns mapped the area, one in 1920 and one in 1943. All of the
resources under study in this series of HABS recordations appeared on the earliest Sanborn
map. The single exception was the cottage at 810 Martin Luther King Jr. Parkway, which
appeared for the first ti.me on the 1920 map.
                                                                            COITAGE
                                                                            HABS No. IA-194
                                                                            Page 22

G.     PROJECT STATEMENT

This documentation stems from the proposed construction of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Parkway loop bypass in Des Moines, Iowa. This project requires demolition of the
building documented in this recordation.

This documentation was prepared for the Des Moines Community Development
Department in partial fulfillment of a Memorandum of Agreement signed by the City of Des
Moines, the Iowa State Historic Preservation Officer, the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation, and the Federal Highway Administration.

Specifications for this recordation were outlined by Gregory D. Kendrick, Chief, History
Branch, Division of National Preservation Programs, Rocky Mountain Regional Office of
the United States Department of the Interior in a letter of May 1993.

William C. Page, Public Historian of Des Moines, acted as principal investigator for the
project and prepared the written narrative. He was assisted by John P. Zeller, researcher,
and Joanne R. Walroth, editor. Ralph J. Christian, Architectural Historian of the State
Historical Society of Iowa, consulted the principal investigator in developing historical
context for this recordation.

Steven Alexander, Alexander's Photography of Des Moines, served as photographer. He
shot all photos for this project and supervised development and printing of the
photographic products.

Mary Neiderbach, Associate Planner of the Des Moines Community Development
Department, served as coordinator.

Christine Whitacre, Historian, Rocky Mountain Regional Office, United States Department
of the Interior, served as project reviewer.

All work for this recordation was accomplished in July, August, and September 1994.
                                                           CoTrAGE
                                                           HABS No. IA-194
                                                           Page 23



                                         AREA MAP
                                      DES MOINES, IO_W A
                                                                     93°37'30"
                                                                           _. ;
                                                                                  0
                                                                                      37'30"




                                                                          - 78 :'~




'1.-1
I
    '
Source: U.S. G. S. Des Moines SW Quadrangle, Iowa.
                                             Figure 1
                                                                                    Con'AGE
                                                                                    HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                    Page 24



                                                    SITE MAP
                                        2019 WOODLAND A VENUE
Scale: 1" =200'.
                                                                                              ~.11
                                                                                l:J
                                                                   ~ Bfl~   srRaT
                                                                                                      96
                                                                                                      II
                                 ---J.J..---,f.1---J..l..--._,---.J




    0
J



ln r~o I~                                                            I ~ OEJBB58 8 G
                                                Woodland Avenue



                                                    "         "1-1

                                                                                                       ~
Sowce: City of Des Moines Engineering Department.
                                                        Figure 2
                                                                   CO'ITAGE
                                                                   HABS No. IA-194
                                                                   Page 25



                                    PLAT
                     T. E. BROWN'S 4TH ADDITION




                             .____:L
                             ~   C6NTA.lt a11tA.IF




                                              ..
                                              l!




                                                       ··-


·,:1~   .



                                                     ,......,, -


       .<~~~-
 ··.        . J:-.




            Source: Polle County Recorder's Office, Plat Book C.
                                 Figure 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Co'ITAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 26




                                                                                                          NEIGHBORHOOD MAP
                                                                                                                  CIRCA 1901
                                                                                                          2015 INDICATED BY ARROW




  ·..
                              rz-1
  o!..i                       L:8. ~l
                              ~,u
            I




  ~i ~-·
     :~J
       ,                  '
                                  --·        I     '




  .: "u· -·
  :!-~ih
        '             ..
                              '
                                            :~
                                      ,..----
                                          1, ••
                                                                             •,


                                                                                                                                                                            ------·----~ ,-
        ]
                                  ·---
                                                                    -a                                                                                                                   I                                         I




   :----1                                                                                                                                                                  I                                                       ~
        ~-~N
        , I

            ID
                                        i                                                                                                                                i~u                                            ,
        'r-~\l l
            .: ,1, I                                                                                                                                                        ~--------1                                             !

                    -='· Fi 1l~ _;!.
                                                                                                                                                                                I I
                .                 I     I    :t'
                                            ..


  ~'
                1L.L.-!.l·..! ,.,•.• - -·~                                                                                                                         I
  ~~.. •                                I
                                        I                                                                                                                    oJ· ~IL ________ _;I :                                            16' L _ _

                                                                                                                                                .O.K
                                                                                  Sca!e of feet.
                ..                           )O' .. 11 ,. ..             0                        ~                       "20             ISO              t::'f;
                     ·~                          :..         fiii:E__                                                    :&J..=---                         \&:                           W 00 DLA N D
. ". • - a 1 e <.I • • • • •                     9 ••   I   lo I   W •   •• •     .. •   •   ••   •   •   ... •   •   ... • •t• •ft
                                                                                                                              -   ~      •HW •   T   I'" ... • • • • • • 19 • R • e .. • e • Iii 9 W W • _ . . w • • .._ W u • -

 Source: Sanborn Map Company, 1901.


                                                                                                                                      Figure4
                                                                                                                                          CO'ITAGE
                                                                                                                                          HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                                                                          Page 27

                                                                                                                                             ,.


                                                                                                                                                            ~w~·:1
                                                                                                                            Al' ~"'"l" ..
                                                                                                                          :1··,'ft••
                                                                                                                                     ·:~v-
                              17~/f
                                                                                                             ,..               I          ~· ~
                                                                                                         ,,       ,.~
                                                                                                                 'Pl'
                                                                                                            : C: ...'r
                                                                                                         ,. . -                                       '
                                                                                                             ,~
                                   ,._                                                                                                    17~


                                                                                       ,..,~


                                                                                      i~·
                                                                                                       --                                 ner

                                                                                                          " '
                                                                                                                                   ~~·"           1
                                                                                                                                                      '•                    ·:·:·1 ···•·,.
                                                                                        '


                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                       "'I'


                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       " I

                                                                                                                                                                  ~ ,.
                                                                                                                                                                       1.'•
                                                                                                                               It•.
                                                                                                                                            '"
                                                                                                        M                                   .1,,.

                                                                                                         •I
                                                                              ..,.,                                                          ::,r;

                                                                                                         It:'



                                                                                        .. ,..,,,.,
                                                                                            (1

                                                                                                                                   ,,.
                                                                                                                                             1,:11

                                                                                                                                             Ill                  './I'
                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                             '\~''

                                                                                            ....                                            "'                    . 'i t ~~J
                                                                                                                                                                         I,
                                                                                                                              .. - -" -• _:,LL-l ... ··~-
                                                                                                                                            /,"1

                                                                                                         .,.                                ,,
                                                                     "' " I .: "'.
                                                                                                                                                                   fJf:f'I r E: R-· -
1.                                                                                                                            ,,1·"1
                                                                                                                                          ..
                                                                                                                                                           ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                       'j      w....;
                                                                                                                                                                                                               r.:;
                                                                                                                                                                                                               _.,...
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~r c...:
                                                                                                                                          .·1
                                                                                                                                                           ...,
                                                                                                                               ,.         ,.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                            ;-:        .,,                                 .~
            •.:;
                         ..   i:                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                          ..                           ,,                                  I
              d
                         ,_
                                                 ·'
                                                   ;:.
                                                                                            ...                                           ,'.'t                                                            t
                                                   ·~                , ~.                              .,.,                                                                                                I
                   -                                                 ,.
                                                                                            •·'                                           ·"
                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                ..., 'N~:~(                                                                                                            ··"I
                                                                                                   ... ,. :                                           :

                                                                                                                                                                  Tlr·
                                                                                                                                          •,•f
                                                                     1'.~,
                                                                                                                          ·"               '"..
                                                                      '•r;            ...          ,.
                                                                                                   "j''
                                                                                                             . ,.         .,,;.                       ~
                                                                                                                                                                  ~I                 ~ l ~\
                                                                   . -                                                                                                                        1,;'
                                                                                                                                                                                 .                 1

        '          I.'                                                "
                                                                          '                 "      ,..
                                                                                                   1,','I
                                                                                                                                                                                ~\            '
                                                               ~
                                                                                                                            "~
                                                                                                                                                                  '\\,.,;;l __,,
                                         ~"       .~           ~·.   .~                             ~                                                             ~··7"·-                    . r       :
                                         :i:·~
                                                                                             ("
                                                                                                   ' ."                     :~                                                  <

                                         Q:l,:
                                                         ..
                                                               I'\    ·~
                                                                      ,il:l                        "'
                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                   ,..... ..,       .. ,,, .,.
                                                                                                                            IJ       1
                                                                                                                                                                                 1''1 \ '

                                                                                                                                                                                '· o·
                                                         •·               Gj
                                                         <:>                                "      ~'.
                                                                                                                    q:)
                                                                                                                    ....    ,.
 ,;(1
                                                         "'           .~
                                                                                      ,· "~.,.         <.. , ..           .:.'rl   ...      , .•.          ..




                                                                                            Figures
                                                                                                                                                     Co'ITAGE
                                                                                                                                                     HABS No. IA-194
                                                                                                                                                     Page 28


          PLAN FOR HARDING ROAD
                                                                    1919
                                                                   t•                       •                           I




                                                                                                                    '               "
                                                                                                                                            rn




                    11j•ti,1.;1 ....·:·.• , . .I.: . I :-•
                    . J.4. ~I~·~,
                                                             .M.u<:;;·"ll·
                                                               F.4
                                                                        .                                        C"r
                                                                                                                -.>-,
         .            ~1.\~. ~., . _!.p·~·:!_·:~'V·-··-·'.·-
                                                           .. -·-·.,...:·-··-.--_.....----.··:
             . JI   /:f~~1:·· ·· 1::.:·;1·:· :.. (·.:. .                                             . . .                     '.       I
~·~!'1>1:'7"'.. A . ..V.,fl.·: I '• :                      .. •, . I        ·, .·       .              . . '        •               '

          .1,: ·:••·•,''.'/.~.1 1·. ;,;._.-:.....
                                               -. ...·....1--.·----·.-··.-.•a,_·_. .

                     ''.'t·'1:.Vrr:'r,~,,J..,·~'L· ",'.:,· ·. "
                    \il.~l'.:L':="~.~~"- · .... ,
                                                                                                  . " A 1/~
                                                                                                    >."'IY&::""'
               %r11;;1~rr.~;·. .,1{;·; ..
              ·•'h'}'t·:•·,  ·· ·J·. .
                                              :S.o.·
                                                  ;·
                                                     UT11~.1. . . · .-
                                                       . H·: .      . .1, ·•. , ..
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                    ••• ••     •• .·.-..
                                                                                                               .~          !        .
                                                                                                                                            .. ( '
                                                                                                                                                •,

               d..;.,.(:.1 ... ,,.,., ·! . ~'        ·..       :        . •••       .           • • '. ·, ::·           .

     Source: Des Moines Register, October 20, 1919.

                                                       Figure 6
