BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE                                                 HAER No. PA-630
Pennsylvania Historic Bridge Recording Project Ill
Spanning Big Chickies Creek
Lancaster Junction
Lancaster County
Pennsylvania




                                           PHOTOGRAPHS

                          WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                           HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                      National Park Service
                                  U.S. Department of the Interior
                                         1849 C St. NW
                                     Washington, DC 20240
                        HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD


                                    BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE


                                      HAER No. PA-630


Location:                    Spanning Big Chickies Creek, Lancaster Junction, Lancaster
                             County, PA
                             BMS #: 36723008750202


UTM:                         Manheim, 18/3811434/4443274


Date of Construction:        1916


Engineer:                    Firm of Frank H. Shaw


Present Owner:               Lancaster County


Present Use:                 Vehicular traffic


Significance:                The tied-through reinforced concrete arch Big Chickies Bridge,
                             built in 1916, is a historically and technologically significant early
                             and rare example in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of a
                             rainbow type tied design bridge with diagonal members.


Historian:                   Richard Vidutis, August 2002



Project Information:         The Pennsylvania Historic Bridge Recording Project III is part of
                             the Historic American Engineering Record (HAER), a long-range
                             program documenting historically significant engineering,
                                          BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                               HAER No. PA-630
                                                        (Page 2)

industrial, and maritime sites in the United States. The National
Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, administers the
HAER program. The Pennsylvania Historic Bridges Recording
Project III was co-sponsored during the summer of 2002 by HAER
under the general direction of E. Blaine Cliver, Chief; and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PENNDOT), Bureau
of Design, Dean A. Schreiber, Director; and the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission, Brent D. Glass, Executive
Director and State Historic Preservation Officer. Ms. Kara Russell
of the Bureau of Design's Environmental Quality Assurance
Division served as principal liaison.



The fieldwork, measured drawings, historical reports, and
photographs were prepared under the direction of Eric DeLony,
Chief of HAER. The team consisted of Architects-Todd Croteau,
Project Leader (HAER Architect), Roland S. Flores, Field
Supervisor (HAER Architect), Marcy Ann Giannunzio (University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor), Katherine Marie Kozarek (University of
California, Berkeley), Sara Kryda (Illinois Institute of
Technology), Jenna Michelle Murphy (University of Detroit-
Mercy), Sandra Christine Pires (ICOMOS-Portugal); Dr. Linda
S. Phipps and Dr. Richard Vidutis served as project historians
under the direction of Dr. Richard O'Connor (Senior HAER
Historian). Jose C. Colon (Pennsylvania State University, State
College) was the project engineer and Professor Thomas E.
Boothby, Ph.D., PE, RA (Pennsylvania State University, State
College) was the consulting engineer. Jet Lowe (HAER
photographer) took all large format photography. Justine
Christianson (HAER Historian) prepared all documentation for
transmittal to the Library of Congress.
                                                                          BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                               HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                        (Page 3)


INTRODUCTION

     The Big Chickies Bridge, currently a vehicular bridge, is located in Rapho and Penn
Townships, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania and is owned by Lancaster County. The bridge
carries Auction Road, a two-lane road, over Big Chickies Creek in an area known as Lancaster
Junction. The bridge is situated in a rural area of active farms and scattered residences from the
late twentieth century. The setting of the bridge does not have the integrity of a historic district
because the farm complexes-found to the northeast and southwest of the bridge-are mixtures
of historic dwellings and modem outbuildings. An exact twin of Big Chickies Bridge, the
Weaverland Bridge (HAER No. PA-589) was also built in 1916 along Township Route 894
(Quarry Road) over Conestoga River in East Earl Township, Lancaster County in a location
called Weaverland.

      The Big Chickies Bridge is notable for having been designed by the firm of Frank H. Shaw.
Frank H. Shaw, Lancaster County Engineer (1909-1917), along with his brother Percy A. Shaw,
Designing Engineer, had a significant impact on reinforced concrete bridge construction in
Lancaster County from approximately 1909 to at least the mid-1920s. During that time about
forty of their designed concrete bridges were built by Lancaster County. It appears that in a
number of cases the firm of Frank H. Shaw also supervised the construction of their designed
bridges.

      During the course of researching the history of the W eaverland Bridge, the original
engineering drawings of the bridge by the firm of Frank H. Shaw were discovered at the
Lancaster County Engineer's Office in Lancaster. Special thanks must be given to Mr. Robert
Navitski, P.E., Assistant County Engineer, who found the drawings in the office's archives and
provided access to the two volumes of Bridge Dockets that contain historic information on
reinforced concrete bridges built in Lancaster County from 1908 to 1924. Since both the
Weaverland Bridge and the Big Chickies Bridge are dimensionally equivalent, and both were
built in 1916, it can be assumed that both were constructed from a set of similar, if not the same,
engineering drawings that were standard for both structures.
                                                                                   BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                        HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                 (Page 4)

HISTORY OF THE BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE


Local Neighborhood History

        The Big Chickies Bridge sits on the border of Penn and Rapho Township and thus serves
both regions as a crossing over Big Chickies Creek.

        The Anglicized pronunciation "Chickies" is a rendition of "Chiquesalunga" (meaning
"place of crayfish") from the Delaware Tribe who were part of the Algonquian linguistic group. 1
Early Europeans referred to the Indians living in the vicinity of the creek as belonging to the
Chiquesalunga Tribe. Over the years various shortened spellings have been used by the Euro-
Americans, who supplanted the Chiquesalunga Tribe, to identify both Big and Little Chickies:
"Chiques," "Chiquis," "Chikis," and the now standard "Chickies."2

        The Chickies system of waterways consists of the Little Chickies, Big Chickies and
Donegal creeks. They drain the northwestern section of Lancaster County into the Susquehanna
River below the Borough of Marietta. Big Chickies rises in Lebanon County and runs in a
southwestwardly direction. 3

        When the early European settlers began arriving in 1716 in the area between the Big and
Little Chickies creeks, they found a land barren of old growth forests. It was a condition created
by Native American practices of setting yearly fires. Instead of trees the landscape contained
stretches of thick-growing hickory and oak saplings and other kinds ofunderbrush. 4

        In 1846, most of present Penn Township was taken from Warwick Township along with
parts of a larger Rapho Township in the vicinity of Mount Hope. Most of the first settlers in the
township were of Germanic and Swiss ancestry who began arriving in the area around
1735, settling along the foot of the Furnace Hills. Their landholding extended southward toward
what is now White Oak (settled in 1794). The oldest town in the township is Penryn, which was

1 http://www.srbc.net/docs/IndianNamesDataChart.PDF
2 Nadine Peterson and Connie L. Torbeck, Historic Resources Survey and Determination of Eligibility Report, S.R.

4003, Section 002, Bridge Replacement Project, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Report prepared by Cultural
Heritage Research Services, Inc., North Wales, Pennsylvania, 1995, p. 3.
3 Justin Roddy, Physical and Industrial Geography of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania (Lancaster: The New Era

Printing Co., 1916), p. 84.
4 Franklin Ellis and Samuel Evans, History of Lancaster County (Philadelphia: Everts & Peck, 1883), p. 758; H.M.J.

Klein, ed., Lancaster County, Pennsylvania: A History. Vol. 1 (New York and Chicago: Lewis Historical Publishing
Co., Inc., 1924), p. 101.
                                                                                    BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                         HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                  (Page 5)

founded in the 1730s. An important industry developed in Limerock in 1880 that took advantage
of the abundant limestone found in the southeast comer of the township. Limestone from the
quarries was shipped by railroad to other parts of the country. 5

          Mount Hope, an early post town with a stagecoach stop, also had the Mount Hope
Chemical Charcoal Works. This important industry engaged in some of the earliest smelting of
iron ore in Lancaster County. The village of Elm, originally called Penn and well known for
Molly Plasterer's Tavern, was located where five roads converged and was a meeting place for
ironworkers from local forges and furn.aces. 6 In time, Penn Township evolved into a growing
suburban area for both Manheim and Lititz Boroughs, as well as for the Lancaster urbanized
area.

          In 1741, citizens of the northeast portion of Donegal Township petitioned the state to
erect a new township. It was acted on favorably and the new township of Rapho was established
in May of that year. The name Rapho was derived from the town ofRaphoe in Ireland, an
ecclesiastical center of the county of Donegal. By 1761, Manheim was laid out and by 1838 was
incorporated as a borough. Today Rapho Township is the largest municipality by area in
Lancaster County, containing approximately 30,300 acres, 20,000 (66 percent) of which is zoned
for agriculture. 7

          The township was settled primarily by Scotch-Irish, who lived in the southern portion of
the township, and later by Swiss and Germans, who settled in the northern section. In the late
nineteenth century, this exceptionally rich agricultural area produced major crops of com, wheat,
oats, and tobacco. 8

          The earliest map researched of the crossing area at Lancaster Junction was by Joshyua
Scott and dates from 1824. Although it indicates no crossing, a J. Snavely is listed as an owner
of land at the place where a road and eventually a bridge was placed; that name appears on maps
as late as 1899.




5 L.H. Everts and D.J. Stewart, Historical Atlas of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania (Philadelphia: Hunter Publisher,

1875); "Penn Township," http://www.penn.co.lancaster.pa.us/penn/cwp/view.asp?a=3&Q=467386&pennNav=I
6 Ibid.
7 Manheim Revisited (Manheim: Manheim Historical Society, 2000), pp. 210-211.
8 Everts and Stewart.
                                                                                   BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                        HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                 (Page 6)

        The H.F. Bridgens from 1864 was printed four years after the first bridge, an iron
structure, was built at the project area. The necessity for the bridge was dictated by the presence
of a complex of mills owned by Hy. Snavely on the Penn side of the creek. His property was
listed as "Distillery & Grist Mercht. & Saw M." Bridgens' 1864 map and Everts and Stewart's
1875 map both show a millrace and what may have been a dam at the point where the millrace
took off southward to cross the road. This enterprising area eventually developed into the village
of Lancaster Junction by 1899, which, at least on the Penn Township side, had fifty-one
structures including a school and a railroad stop called the Lancaster Junction Station. An
interesting detail in the Graves and Steinberger's 1899 map is the fact that the creek was still
referred to as the "Chiquesalunga Creek."



HISTORY OF THE BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE

Earlier Crossings

        In 1860, Elias McMellen and William Corvin were contracted to build an iron bridge for
$1,088.00 at Henry Snavely's Mill on the road from the Colebrook Road to the Lancaster,
Petersburg and Manheim Road between Rapho and Penn Townships. The length of the bridge
was 63 ', the roadway measured 16', and the height from low water was 1O'. Viewers were sent
in 1855 and 1856 to report on the need for the bridge, and in 1861, inspectors filed their approval
with the court on the newly built iron bridge. 9

        In subsequent years, H.S. Kaufinan made repairs in 1878 for $135; in 1883, by Peter
Helman for $148.20; and in 1893, by the original builder, E. McMellen for $590. In 1909, James
Bruder refloored, painted, and lightened the iron bridge for $173 .10



Selection of the Contractors

      The iron bridge was replaced in 1916 by a one span concrete bridge with abutments on the
same site as the iron bridge between the Borough of Manheim and Penn Township. 11 J. Miller

9 Bridge Dockets, Commissioners' Office, Lancaster County Court House (small volume), p. 223. Lancaster Court
House, Lancaster City, has two undated volumes of Bridge Dockets distinguished only by size (one small and one
large volume), but both have bridges arranged by the name of the creek or river they cross. The numbering system
for the bridges is flexible in that they are assigned different numbers throughout the history of the bridge.
JO Ibid.
                                                                                         BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                              HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                       (Page 7)

    Eshleman built it for $2,276.97. 12 By agreement of the County Commissioners of Lancaster and
)   the Borough and Township authorities, the new reinforced concrete bridge was to be kept up and
    in repair by the Borough of Manheim and Penn Township. 13



    Description of the Big Chickies Bridge
            The firm of Frank H. Shaw designed the reinforced concrete Big Chickies Bridge, which
    J. Miller Eshleman built in 1916. 14 Although engineering drawings for the Big Chickies Bridge
    were not found during the research phase of this report, they were unearthed for the W eaverland
    Bridge-an exact twin of the Big Chickies Bridge-and can be used equally to describe the
    construction features of both.
            An interesting anomaly appears in the described length of the Big Chickies Bridge.
    Bridge Dockets lists the length of the bridge, it is assumed at the time of construction, as 62'-3"
    long and 15'-11" wide. 15 Yet, in A.G. Lichtenstein's report in 2000, the bridge was measured at
    58' long and 20' wide. 16 Apart from errors in measuring, either then or now, what accounts for
    this discrepancy of 4' in length and 5' in width is not known.
          The 58' arch section of the bridge consists of two parallel arches with vertical suspenders
    from which a concrete slab deck is hung. Within the arch's five panels diagonal suspension ribs
    (cross beams) are employed, a very unusual feature for a bow arch bridge and one that made the
    Shaw version distinguishable from the Marsh design. The use of these diagonal elements may
    have been incorporated into the design in order not to infringe on Marsh's 1912 patent for the
    Rainbow bridge.
          The rebar system of bars and stirrups shows that the four vertical ribs hang from the arch
    and are tied into four transverse girders onto which the slab roadway is placed.


    11 Pennsylvania Historic Bridge Inventory & Elevation, BMS# 36723008750202, Big Chickies Bridge II, prepared

    by A.G. Lichtenstein & Associates, Inc., Paramus, New Jersey, 2000, erroneously states that the bridge was built in
    1922. Data recorded in the Bridge Dockets clearly establishes that the bridge was built in 1916, the same year as its
    twin at Weaverland over Conestoga River, East Earl Township, Lancaster County.
    12 Bridge Dockets, (small volume).

    l3 Ibid.
    14 Robert Navitski, P.E., Assistant County Engineer, found the drawings in the archives of the Lancaster County

    Engineer's Office, Lancaster Court House, Lancaster City.
    15 Bridge Dockets, (large volume), p. 48.
    16 Pennsylvania Historic Bridge Inventory & Elevation.
                                                                         BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                              HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                       (Page 8)

      The abutments, piers, wing walls, coping, and floor of the bridge are of concrete. 17 Both
ends rest on concrete abutments. The abutments are U-shaped and tied together by reinforced
concrete ties. Heavy concrete capped end posts decorate both ends of the main section.
Galvanized piping, perhaps functioning as a handrail and guard, extend through the arches.
      Much like Percy Frank's Conestoga Bridge at Rupp's Mill discussed above, the Big
Chickies Bridge apparently provided the maximum opening needed over Big Chickies Creek at
the Lancaster Junction for water to flow under the rainbow arch. Bridges over small rivers or
creeks with small apertures can become sizeable obstructions to a river's flow, often forming a
weir of driftwood blocking the flow through the apertures. The Big Chickies Bridge was
considered long enough to allow the width of the creek to flow freely. Perhaps the history of
flooding along Big Chickies Creek in that region of Lancaster County did not necessitate an
extension to the bridge as was the case of the twin of Big Chickies Bridge at Weaverland. There
the rainbow arch was not modified to produce a single span to cross the approximately 75' wide
river but there was an extension.
      There are two possible reasons for the situation at the Weaverland crossing, either: 1) a 75'
girder slab was considered impractical as an engineering solution or an economic one; or 2) the
rainbow arch bridge with diagonal elements was one of a number of readily available and
previously designed structures that Shaw offered as solutions for particular crossings and
budgets. In comparing the costs ofboth bridges-the Weaverland Bridge at $3,630.19, and the
Big Chickies Bridge at $2,276.97-the difference in price for the Weaverland structure was an
extra $1,353.22 for a slab girder section about 18' -8" long resting on a pier and a concrete
abutment that extended the bridge roadway southward and allowed for water overflow.



DEVELOPMENT OF THE REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGE

      In order to understand the Big Chickies Bridge's place in the history ofreinforced concrete
bridge development, it is necessary to discuss some major phases in the history of reinforced
concrete bridge design and construction.




17 Bridge Dockets, (large volume), p. 154.
                                                                                      BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                           HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                    (Page 9)

      The reinforced concrete bridge was first developed in Europe, but it was slow to be
accepted in America. In 1876, Jean Monier of Prance invented the first concrete metal arch by
imbedding wire netting in the concrete of the arches. In 1884, R. Wunsch of Hungary, invented
the Wunsch system of concrete metal arch building. It consisted of an arched lower and straight
upper member of metal imbedded in concrete and connected with vertical members deeply
imbedded in piers and abutments. In 1892, Joseph Melan, of Austria-Hungary, developed the
concrete metal arch known as the Melan system, which was patented in the United States in
1893. 18 The Melan system consisted of arched ribs filled with concrete and rigidly connected to
abutments, beams and girders. Melan bridges were built throughout Europe and the United
States (where as many as twenty-seven had been constructed by 1899). 19

      In 1894, a German born engineer working in America by the name of Fritz von Emperger,
claimed that concrete and steel could be used successfully in the construction ofbridges. 20 Tests
in Austria proved that such a combination would indeed produce a strong structure. The faith in
the miraculous qualities of this combination of materials lead to the belief that steel would be
permanently preserved if set in concrete and that the bridge would actually strengthen by
degree.2 1 In 1902, Daniel B. Luten, a prominent American designer ofreinforced concrete
bridges, described the advantages of bridges built from such materials:

         A concrete arch, properly constructed, is practically indestructible. As it grows older it
         grows stronger: it is not affected by weather; it requires neither painting nor repairing; it
         has no plank floor system to be continually out of order; it is made of materials that can
         usually be purchased in the immediate vicinity, and labor as well as materials may be, to
         a large extent, the home products of the town or county; and it is a handsome bridge
         structure-for not only is the arch form especially adapted to artistic treatment, but
         concrete is a material that can be molded into many forms of ornament at small cost. 22


18 Carl Condit dates the patent to 1894, see American Building: Materials and Techniques from the First Colonial

Settlements to the Present (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1968), p. 174.
19 Edwin Thacher, "Concrete-Steel Bridge Construction," Engineering News XLII, no. 12 (September 21, 1899):

181.
°
2 Fritz von Emperger, "The Development and Recent Improvement of Concrete-Iron Highway Bridges"

Transactions, American Society of Civil Engineers Vol. XXXI, 1894.
21 Thacher, p. 179; Daniel B. Luten explained that since steel gives off carbonic acid, which is the cause of rust,

"concrete by its absorption of carbonic acid gas grows continually stronger with age, and the suitability of concrete-
steel for bridge construction becomes most evident; as traffic grows heavier, the bridge grows stronger, quite a
contrast from any other form of bridge erected." Daniel B. Luten, "Concrete-Steel Bridges," Municipal Engineering
XXIII, no. 3 (September 1902): 156.
22 Daniel B. Luten, "Highway Bridges of Concrete," Municipal Engineering XIX, no. 6 (December 1900): 388.
                                                                                  BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                       HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                               (Page 10)

      In 1904, M.A. Considere designed and built the first recorded example of a reinforced
concrete bowstring bridge in France that appears to have been directly based on a metal
bowstring bridge. In America, the first known example to be built was designed by Howard M.
Jones, Engineer of the Cumberland River Bridge Commission in Nashville, Tennessee, who
considered European concrete bridges to be too complicated. He produced a bridge with
concrete trusses without diagonals as deck spans on the approaches to the bridge, and placed the
deck above the arches that rested on existing piers. 23 By 1912, Marsh received a patent for his
reinforced concrete fixed through arch "Rainbow" bridge. Unfortunately, Marsh's rainbow
design received limited acceptance and never became an industry standard. Nevertheless,
variations of the Marsh design, in particular the tied through arch, can be found throughout the
country, two of which were built in Lancaster County.

      The beginning of the twentieth century marked the advent of construction with reinforced
concrete in the United States. Engineers were fascinated with its potential as a building material
and believed it to be practically indestructible, making bridges nearly maintenance and
replacement free. 24 Indeed, this relatively new construction material provided exceptional
compression strength at a low cost compared to metal, which always needed the upkeep of
painting and even replacement of its metal parts. During the first two decades of the twentieth
century, concrete met the needs of municipalities that were looking for replacement bridges that
offered economy, strength, and attractiveness. 25 In 1908, the best example to spur those views in
Pennsylvania was the construction of Philadelphia's Walnut Street Bridge. The 233' long
concrete structure set an example in its size, beauty and park setting for all engineers of the day
who were fascinated with concrete as a construction material. 26

      For engineers building with concrete during this time period, the main problem was how to
use the qualities of concrete's compressive strength along with its low-tension resistance
irrelevant to a structure. Influential engineering writers F .E. Turnaure and E.R. Maurer advised


23 Frances A. Jones, "Benson Street Concrete Bowstring Bridge," HAER No. OH-50, Historic American

Engineering Record (HAER), National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
24 Thacher, p. 180.
25 John Lyle Harrington, "Recent Developments in Bridge Superstructures," Proceedings of the Engineers' Society

of Western Pennsylvania 46, no. 3 (Mar. 1930): 63.
26 Helen P. Ross, "Walnut Lane Bridge," HAER No. PA-504, Historic American Engineering Record (HAER),

National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1998; revised and expanded by Justin M. Spivey, 2001.
                                                                                   BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                        HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                (Page 11)

engineers that the solution lay not in choosing between concrete and steel, but in using both
together. 27 Although steel was expensive, it had high tensile strength especially in the form of
bars, but needed to be made more heat resistant and durable. Concrete seemed to support steel in
ways that made its expense affordable; for example, it greatly slowed steel's corrosive process
while itself being durable and fireproof. Concrete was much cheaper because, unlike steel,
which had to be produced at a mill, it could be mixed at the work site. Tumaure and Maurer
compared current prices for concrete and steel and concluded that encasing steel rods, beams, or
columns in concrete would significantly alter the actual cost per unit of strength in bridge
building. The savings would come from the use of steel reinforcing rods instead of using
fabricated steel members. By the 1930s, it was becoming clear that concrete structures suffered
from their own litany of problems, including discoloration, streaking, and cracks. Poor
workmanship made it difficult to correct errors in installation.



The Rainbow Arch Bridge

      The type of arch bridge employed over Big Chickies Creek at Lancaster Junction was
designed by James B. Marsh (1856-1936) who received a patent for it in 1912. The patent
application stated that the object of the invention was "to construct an arch bridge of reinforced
concrete in such a manner as to permit a limited amount of expansion and contraction both of the
arches and of the floor." James B. Marsh's patented design used rainbow arches that would
expand and contract along with the bridge floor under varying conditions of moisture and
temperature. Marsh built hundreds of these bridges in the 1910s to 1930s, mostly throughout the
Midwest. Another feature that was attractive was the completely flat floor, in contrast to older
bridges that may have had a hump in the middle. There are only a few remaining bridges of this
type in the United States.

      James B. Marsh, a civil engineer, from Des Moines, Iowa, was an American pioneer in
designing bowstring concrete bridges. In the mid- l 890s, Marsh began experimenting with the
use of concrete in bridge construction. He produced two basic bridge designs where the arch


27 F.E. Turnaure and E.R. Maurer, Principles of Reinforced Concrete Construction 2nd rev. ed. (New York: John

Wiley & Sons, 1913), pp. 4-5.       ·
                                                                                  BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                       HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                               (Page 12)

rises above the deck, one for a fixed and one for a tied arch. On August 6, 1912, he received a
patent (United States Patent number 1,035,026) for his innovative design for the fixed arch. 28
The fixed arch design contained wear plates at the points where the bridge floor came into
contact with the beams and abutments. In contrast to the tied arch, which rests on the abutments,
the fixed arch continues below deck level and is attached to the abutments. The tied arch allows
construction even if the ground is not solid enough to deal with the horizontal forces produced by
the arches as they spread their loads towards the abutments. Rather than relying on the
foundation to restrain the horizontal forces, the girder itself "ties" both ends of the arch together.
A tied arch bridge rests on abutments and causes a vertical load on the abutments. Both types of
Marsh arches allowed for the expansion and contraction of the bridge parts during changes in
temperature. 29

       The tied arch bridge has a number of defining structural aspects: it is used where the
supporting rock foundation cannot resist the arch thrust; the horizontal thrust of the arch is
taken entirely by the tie; the tie arch is always used as a through span; the deck floor is always
carried by hangers; and where there are a multiple series of tied arch spans, they are always a
succession of individual tied arches. 30

       The deck of a tied through arch bridge may be either a slab span or a girder span. The
reinforced concrete slab span is one of the simplest and least expensive technologies used in
bridge construction. A simple slab bridge can be composed of single or multiple slabs, each of
which typically ranges from 20' to 50' in length. In a single slab bridge the slab rests directly
on the abutments. If multiple slabs are used, joints are visible where the slabs come together.
In a continuous slab bridge, the slab is poured as one unit so there are no visible joints. For
longer spans intermediate supports of timber, concrete, or steel in a wide range of shapes are
used. Slabs are used for short span bridges where headroom is limited and were a common




28 James B. Marsh, Patent: Reinforced Arch Bridge, Patent No. 1,035,026, Patented August 6, 1912.


29 Historic American Engineering Record (HAER), National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, "Spring

Street Bridge," HAER No. WI-37. Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress.
30 Ibid.
                                                                         BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                              HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                      (Page 13)

highway bridge type in the 1930-40s. A simple slab bridge is easily distinguished by its flat
underside. 31

       Though similar in appearance to a slab bridge, the concrete girder bridge is distinguished
by a series of longitudinal concrete beams on its underside. The girders can be an integral part
of the slab, known as monolithic construction, or they can be poured separately. Each girder is
typically of a uniform dimension throughout its length. Crossbeams are sometimes placed
between the girders to provide extra support. The same supports used for slab bridges are also
found on girder bridges. Since less concrete is required in the construction of a girder bridge
than in the flat slab, it is typically used for longer spans, such as the one used for the Big
Chickies Bridge at Lancaster Junction. 32

       Marsh's designs brought a number of innovative features to the building of reinforced
concrete through arch bridges that resulted in the elimination of many time consuming tasks
involved in traditional concrete construction. In the construction of a Marsh arch design,
complete trusses were employed for the reinforcement in the arches. The metal truss work was
assembled on the ground and then lifted into place. Angle irons, eight to a side, were attached to
the arch and served as the hangers for the deck. Steel trusses were also used for the bottom
chords, which supported their own formwork thus eliminating costly and time-consuming
formwork arrangements beneath the bridge. Next, large steel I-beams were welded to hangers
across the width of the bridge to which form work attached. At this point, the concrete deck was
poured. After the deck concrete had cured, the arches and hangers were cast in concrete. 33

       The chief advantages of the Marsh building system for engineer designers, fabricators, and
municipal treasurers were ease of construction and economy of resources. Technologically the
advantages rested in the ability to construct a reinforced concrete bridge with minimal weight
and floor thickness, yet allowing for unlimited headroom below the deck. Since all tension is
exerted on the vertical hangers, horizontal web members are eliminated. Finally, the whole span




31 Ibid.
32 Ibid.
33 Ibid.
                                                                         BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                              HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                      (Page 14)

is protected from the weather by an outer layer of concrete. The end result is an aesthetically
pleasing structure that provided a strong and economical crossing. 34



Construction of Concrete Bridges in Lancaster County, 1908-1924

       In 1908, Lancaster County began replacing its wooden and iron bridges with reinforced
concrete spans in response to increasing automobile traffic over less traveled local roads. It is
within this context, and the rise of popularity of building with reinforced concrete, that the Big
Chickies Bridge is found.

       Construction of the Big Chickies Bridge can be better understood in the context of the
history of concrete bridge construction in Lancaster County as recorded in the Bridge Dockets
(both the small and the large volume) of the Commissioners' Office that are now archived at the
County Engineer's Office in the Lancaster County Court House. The two books are retained at
the County Engineer's Office as documents of Lancaster County's historic bridge building
activities. Unfortunately, the two volumes are suffering some deterioration, and not all the pages
appear to be present or intact. For example, it is quite clear that a number of photographs of the
bridge structures are missing that were taken the year the bridges were constructed.
Nevertheless, the information contained there can be gathered into a revealing table of statistics
that show concrete bridge construction by Lancaster County during the years of 1908 to 1924,
the height of concrete bridge building in Pennsylvania, when Lancaster County alone built at
least twenty concrete bridges on its territory, in addition to whatever number the state had also
constructed in the county. The two volumes of Bridge Dockets do not contain concrete bridge
information beyond 1924.

       Table 1 of statistics included below is for twenty reinforced concrete bridges built from
1908 to 1924. The data was taken from both small and large volumes of Bridge Dockets located
at the Lancaster County Court House in Lancaster. The information in the Bridge Dockets is
incomplete as it is known that the firm of Frank H. Shaw alone designed at least forty bridges.




34 Ibid.
                                                                                                     BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                                          HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                                  (Page 15)

          Table 1 shows that the builder of the Big Chickies Bridge concrete bridge, J. Miller
  Eshleman, built his first concrete bridge in 1916. In 1920, Eshleman built a two-span girder
  reinforced concrete over Big Beaver Creek in Strasburg and Providence Townships. He is not
  mentioned again after building his second bridge. 35

          The most prolific builders of Lancaster County reinforced concrete bridges were John
  Brubaker and Paul D. Kauffmann. In all, Brubaker worked on five bridges from 1913 to 1918:
  In 1913, Brubaker built a concrete bridge over Peters Creek along a road from Wick's Mill to
  Peach Bottom; in 1914, he repaired a concrete bridge that was built by LS. Mcllvain; in 1916,
  the Weaverland Bridge; in 1917, a bridge over Big Beaver Creek near Camargo; and in 1918,
  together with F.A. Heart, a structure over Pequea Creek along Beaver Valley Pike. The last
  entry in the Bridge Dockets for Brubaker was for a small job, for which he received $210, to
  repair the Weaverland reinforced concrete bridge that he built in 1916. 36 Paul D. Kauffmann
  built three Lancaster County reinforced concrete bridges all in 191 7. He built three-spans just
  over 130' long and about 20' wide were built in West Earl Township over the Conestoga River,
  and a 131' long single span over Cocalico Creek, which divides Warwick & Ephrata Townships.

          Judging from the extant documents found in the Bridge Dockets, the majority of reinforced
  concrete bridges were built by contractors during the sixteen-year period recorded in the volumes
  were over Pequea (seven) and Conestoga (five) Creeks.

                                            Table 1.
             Reinforced Concrete Bridges Contracted by Lancaster County, 1908-1924 37
Concrete Span/        Date       Builder         Cost      Township(s)       Waterway        Road carried     Location      Bridge Photo
 Bridge  Width                                              [// = between]   Crossed                                        Docket (sm);
  Type    (ft.)                                                                                                              Page   (lg)
1-span(?) 70/16       1908 Ferro-Concrete Co. $3,603.50   / Warwick &        Hammer      ?                  B.H. Snavely's 281 {sm); Yes;
                                                          Elizabethtown      Creek                          Mill           308 (lg) yes
1-span,   63/18       1910 Nelson Merydith    $4,334.57   West Earl          Conestoga Farmersville to · Burkholder's     125 (sm) Yes
girder                     Co.                                               River     New Berlin        Mill*
                           (Chambersburg)
2-span    77/20       1910 A. Buchanan        $6,308.99    / Strasburg &     ?           ?                  Ferguson's    373 (lg)   No
                           (Chambersburg)                 WFallow                                           Mill
                                                          (Chester Co.)




   35 Bridge Dockets, Commissioner's Office, (small volume), p'. 1.
   36 Ibid, p. 113.
   37 Information in the Bridge Dockets in the small (sm) volume and in the large (lg) is incomplete because some
   fields were not entered and some photographs have been lost. Where that information was absent, the cells in the
   table are marked by a "?".
                                                                                                      BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                                           HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                                   (Page 16)

?-span, ?           1911 Heppler & Gilbert    $1,107.33    Ii/ Coleman &    W Branch     Pine Grove to    ?                367 (lg)   Yes
girder/sla               (Coatesville)                     Little Britain   Octoraro     Union
b (?)                                                                       Creek
1-span    40/16     1913 John T. Brubaker     $1,795.15    Fulton           Peters       Wick's Mill to   Dorsey's Mill    ~89(sm) No
                                                                            Creek        Peach Bottom
1-span    140/16    1913 Nelson Merydith      1$15,738.68 Ii/ Martic &      Pequea       ?                at mouth of  ~64 {sm) No
                         Co.                              Conestoga         Creek                         Pequea Creek
                          Chambersburg)
2-span    100/14    1913 J.S. Mcilvain        $2,502.50    Salisbury        Pequea       ?                Amos Hess's ~21 (lg)        No
                                                                            Creek                         Mill
3-span, 131/17      1914 J.S. Mcilvain;      $4,365.75     East Earl        Conestoga Blue Ball to        Samuel         111 (sm); Yes;
Sirder on                repaired by John T.                                River     Reading             Gehman's       150 (lg) yes
12 piers                 Brubaker                                                                         Mill; or Aaron
                                                                                                          Martinis Mill
                                                                                                          (sm Dock. Bk)
2-span    79/19,8   1916 John T. Brubaker     $3,630.19    East Earl        Conestoga    Quarry Rd.       Eli Martin's Mill 113(sm) ?
arch                                                                        River
1-span    62,3/     1916 J. Miller Eshleman; $2,276.97     Ii/ Rapho &      Big          Colebrook Rd. Lancaster     48 (lg); ?; ?
arch**    15,11                                             Penn            Chickies     o Lancaster-   Junction     228 (sm)
                                                                            Creek        Petersburg Rd.
girder    28,5 I?   1917 µohn T. Brubaker     $1,179.50    Eden             Big Beaver   ?              near Camargo 127 (sm) No
                                                                            Creek
1-span(?) 131/?     1917 Paul D. Kauffmann    !>5,691.00   I// Waiwick &    Cocalico     ?                ?                51 (sm);   No;
                                                            Ephrata         Creek                                          122 (lg)   yes
3-span,   131/18,5 1917 Paul D. Kauffmann $10,213.00 West Earl              Conestoga    Talmage Rd.      Kafroth's Mill   170 (lg)   IY'es
girder                                                                      River
3-span    134/21,5 1917 Paul D. Kauffmann ?                West Earl        Conestoga    Farmersville Rd. Wenger's Mill ?             I?
                                                                            River
2-span, 100/?       1918 Uohn T. Brubaker & $10,475.94 / Strasburg &        Pequea       Beaver Valley    ?                445 (sm) No
girder                   F.A. Heart                    WLampeter            Creek        Pike
 50'each
2-span, ?           1920 µ. Miller Eshleman   $10,072.36 '/ Strasburg &     Big Beaver New Providence Mylin's Mill         1 (sm}     l'(es
girder(?)                                                Providence         Creek      o Lancaster
1-span(?)?          1920 Pearthree            1$12,447.29 '/ Martic &       Pequea       ?                Martic Forge     ~59{sm) No
girder                                                    Conestoga         Creek
steel

2-span    ?         1921 !Solomon Butts &     1$12,990.00 '/ Pequea &       Pequea       ?                near Pequea 447 (sm) ·No
                          Geo. H. Calder                   Providence       Creek                         Valley Tavern
2-span    ?         1922- Swangler-Feckler    $9,248.77; 'I Leacock &       Pequea       ?                 ?            ~25 (lg) No
                    1923 Construction Co.     F.H. Shaw Paradise            Creek
                          (Lebanon)           supervised
                                              construction
                                              ($1,533)
~-span,   ?         1924 Ferro-Concrete Co. 1$13, 104.00 'I Leacock &       Pequea       Paradise to      ?                ~26 (sm) Yes
girder                                                   Paradise           Creek        Intercourse
   * Percy A. Shaw's article on this bridge in Engineering Record refers to the location as Rupps' Mill, not
   Burkholder's Mill.
   ** Data on the Big Chickies Bridge (an exact twin of the Weaverland Bridge designed by the Shaw firm) were
   missing from both volumes of Bridge Dockets but are included in this list of reinforced concrete bridges.



   Percy A. and Frank H. Shaw

          In 1916, Frank H. Shaw (1872-1950), Civil, Hydraulic and Sanitary, and Water Works
   Engineer, and a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, had an engineering
   business located in the Breneman Building at 53 Duke Street, Lancaster City. His home
                                                                                      BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                           HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                   (Page 17)

residence at that time was listed as 206 Ruby Street. Advertisements by Shaw in the Lancaster
City Directory for the year of construction of the Big Chickies Bridge indicate a wide range of
engineering services, including surveys of subdivisions, cities, boroughs, farm and topographic;
and water works, sewage, bridges, railways, tanks, bins, and buildings. 38

      The Big Chickies Bridge that Eshleman was contracted to build may have been designed
by Percy A. Shaw, the brother of Frank H. Shaw. An article, authored by Percy in 1911, on the
construction of a reinforced concrete through transverse girder bridge states that he was its
engineering designer located in Reading. 39 We do not know how long Percy worked with Frank
on the firm's construction projects, but the possibility exists that Percy may have been a designer
of other bridges created by the company. Because of the name of the firm and the time
consuming efforts traveling and selling the firm's wares and reputation, while managing offices
in different cities, Frank H. Shaw probably became the better the better recognized of the two
brothers.

      Frank Shaw moved to Lancaster County around 1905 from Massachusetts and became an
inspector of its first concrete bridge built by the Ferro-Concrete Company of Harrisburg in 1908.
In 1909, he began advertising his own engineering firm in Lancaster and at the same time was
appointed Lancaster County Engineer, a position he held until 1917; from 1911 to 1913, he was
also the county's superintendent of water works. After relinquishing his position of County
Engineer in 1917, he continued working for the county as a consulting engineer. Frank Shaw's
interests were not limited to bridge building but extended to all aspects of reinforced concrete
construction. His imprint on the county includes sewer works along Lancaster's Water and Clay
Streets, and a water tower now found on the Franklin and Marshall College campus; his water
system works are also to be found in Elmira, New York, and Reading, Pennsylvania; he also laid
out street railway lines in cities in the East. During his career, he also contracted building works
in East Orange, New Jersey (1919-20), Houston (1923-24), and Washington, DC (1935) where




38 Lancaster City Directory (Lancaster: R.L. Polk & Co., Publishers, 1916), p. 112.
39 Percy A. Shaw, "A Reinforced Concrete Through Girder Bridge," Engineering Record 64, no.26 (December 23,

1911): pp. 744-5.
                                                                                  BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                       HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                               (Page 18)

he also had offices. It is for the design and construction of concrete bridges that Frank Shaw,
with apparent help from his brother Percy, is best remembered in Lancaster County. 40

      During his tenure as county engineer, Frank (and possibly Percy) designed and developed
at least forty reinforced concrete bridges; 41 two of the trusses 42 are still in service today along
with half-a-dozen cantilevered through girder bridges. 43 Although Percy's influence and impact
on Lancaster County's infrastructure as a designer is subsumed in Frank's reputation, it may
have been substantial. Percy noted in his 1911 article that he was the "Designing Engineer"
(residing in Reading) of a reinforced concrete through girder bridge at Rupps Mill in Lancaster
County. 44 Therefore, it seems very likely that he may have designed other bridges as well for the
Shaw firm. Since Frank was concurrently acting as Lancaster County's County Engineer,
Superintendent of Water Works, consulting engineer, supervisor of construction, in addition to
running a private engineering construction firm. Also, it can be assumed that Frank Shaw was
trying at the same time to sell his company's wares to other regions of the country as seen in the
fact that soon after he quit his position of county engineer in 1917, he continued his career as a
civil engineer by opening offices in other cities, perhaps in part based on his established
reputation in Lancaster County. At least in 1910, Percy worked out of the Reading office and
may have designed many of the bridges for which Frank H. Shaw, or the company of Frank H.
Shaw, became famous. Frank Shaw's obituary proclaimed a unique place for him in history for
his management and supervision of bridge construction projects in Lancaster County. It stated:
"the first concrete bridges ever built in Lancaster bear his name as the engineer."45



Percy A. Shaw's Ethnographic Engineering Statement

40 R.L. Polk, Lancaster City Directory (Lancaster: R.L. Polk & Co., 1905); Lancaster County, Commissioners' Court

Minutes, 1916-1920, 5 April 1909, Lancaster County Archives, Lancaster; "Frank H. Shaw is Dead at 78," obituary
in Lancaster New Era, 15 May 1950; "Frank H. Shaw Dies; Was Former Water Works Supt," obituary in Lancaster
Intelligencer Journal, 15 May 1950; M. Luther Heisey," The Water Supply of Lancaster" Journal of the Lancaster
County Historical Society 41, no. 1 (1937): p. 34.
41 Justin M. Spivey, "Big Conestoga Creek Bridge No. 12," HAER No. PA-500, Historic American Engineering

Record (HAER), National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, August 1998, Prints and Photographs
Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., pp. 2, 6.
42 The W eaverland Bridge and the Big Chickies Bridge.
43 S ·
    p1vey.
44 Shaw
45 "Frank H. Shaw is Dead at 78."
                                                                        BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                             HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                     (Page 19)

       Percy A. Shaw's article, "A Reinforced Concrete Through Girder Bridge," over Conestoga
Creek is a valuable piece of descriptive evidence explaining the reasoning underlying the
selection of the bridge type and description of building techniques employed in construction of
the bridge. It can be assumed that comparable approaches were used in the later bridges
designed and supervised by the Shaw firm.

       Percy's designed Conestoga girder bridge can shed some light on the Big Chickies Bridge
bow arch built six years later at Lancaster Junction. The Conestoga girder and the Big Chickies
Bridge slab deck show similarities. The descriptions of how the bridge was reasoned and built
are worth discussing here to give us an insight into the early years of reinforced concrete bridge
building in Lancaster County as envisioned and practiced by the Shaws. Some of their evolving
designs and building methods were probably practiced by the firm throughout the years they
designed bridges and supervised their construction.

a.     Type and Style of the Conestoga Bridge

       For the Conestoga Bridge Percy chose a single clear span (63' x 18') roadway instead of
two girder spans "in order to secure the largest possible waterway, and thus provide against the
stoppage of drift brought down by the stream during floods, which are frequent in that
vicinity."46 Abutment and wingwalls from the old bridge were utilized by reinforcing them with
a shell of reinforced concrete 12" to 16" thick. Parapet walls were cast monolithic with the
wingwalls, but not reinforced. They have deep panels to save weight and to reduce the cost of
form work as Percy reasoned that the "span depends for whatever beauty it possesses on the
bold, clean lines of the massive concrete work."47

b.     Bridge Movement

       Movement dynamics of the bridge consisting of expansion and contraction due to
temperature changes and setting of the concrete were allowed for by resting the span at each end
on a half-inch ofHydrex felt and compound while the girders and parapet walls had a heavy
coating of the compound between them.

c.     Stress Formulas and Concrete Mixtures

46 Shaw, p. 744.
47 Ibid.
                                                                              BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                   HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                           (Page 20)

     Stress limits and concrete mixtures for the bridge were employed as follows:

                                           Table 2.
                                  Conestoga Bridge Formulas
      Stress limits:       Live load:                            100 lb. per sq. ft. (equivalent to:
                                                                 15-ton road roller with axles 11"
                                                                 apart, 6 tons on a 4' wide front
                                                                 wheel, and 4.5 tons on each rear
                                                                 20" wheel 5' apart center to
                                                                 center).
                           Dead load:                            weight of bridge plus 9" of
                                                                 crushed stone on the roadway.
                           Unit stress:                          16,000 lb. in tension
                                                                 12,000 lb. in compression.
                           Concrete compressive strength:        600 lb.
      Concrete mixtures:   spans and wingwalls:                  1:2:4
                           abutments and wingwall foundations:   1:3:6



d.   The Crew
     The contractor employed one foreman, one assistant foreman, one engineer, two to four
carpenters, and five to twelve laborers.
e.   Sequence of Construction and Formwork
     First the abutment and wingwall reinforcing shell was placed, then the parapet walls, and
finally the formwork for the span was erected before the concrete was poured. Timbers, securely
braced to prevent washing out and resting on the ledge in the streambed, were used for supports
for the span framework.
f.   Concrete Work
     This crew mixed the concrete by a batch mixer mounted on a truck with a boiler and
engine. The reinforcement bars in the span, with the exception of the compression bars, were put
in place and securely wired. The concrete was then poured in one continuous operation for the
entire span-both floors and girders-in layers from one end of the bridge to the other with no
concrete having set when new work was set upon it. The pouring of the concrete ran for fifty-six
continuous hours starting at 7 a.m. on September 2 and ended on September 4 in the afternoon.
After forty-eight hours, all the forms, with the exception of those supporting the heavy weight of
the span, were removed and the concrete surfaces given a final finish. After three weeks, the
forms supporting the span were finally removed. Construction of the Conestoga Bridge
                                                                                   BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                                        HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                                (Page 21)

commenced June 27, 1910, and was completed September 13, 1910, a total of sixty-six days of
construction work.
g.   Cost of the Conestoga Bridge to Lancaster County
     Table 3 below lists the work items contracted by the County of Lancaster with the Shaw
construction company for the building of the Conestoga reinforced concrete bridge. It is
assumed that labor costs are subsumed in the prices charged by the Shaw firm for materials and
in removing the old bridge and excavation work. The most expensive materials contained in a
reinforced concrete bridge are concrete and reinforcement steel. The cost of the concrete and
steel bars came to $3,985.88, or 92 percent of the total cost budgeted by the county for this
bridge.
     It can be seen then that Percy's information about bridge building-the reasoning involved
in choosing the bridge type, the descriptions of construction methods, and a break down of the
costs involved-gives us a window into the history of reinforced concrete construction in the
early 1900s in Pennsylvania.


                                        Table 3.
                      Conestoga Bridge Construction Items and Costs
                       Construction Items          Units       Cost per    Total
                                                                Unit
                   Removing old bridge                                      $125.00
                   Concrete (1:2:4)             241.4 cu.yd.    $11.50    $2,776.10
                   Concrete (1 :3:6)            49.3 cu.yd.      $9.00     $443.70
                   Steel reinforcing            25,536 lb.       $0.03     $766.08
                   Above mean low water         69.5 cu.yd.      $0.45       $31.28
                   earth excavation
                   Below mean low water         10.5 cu.yd.      $2.10      $22.05
                   earth excavation
                   Rock excavation              38 cu.yd.        $1.60       $60.80
                   Crushed stone for road bed   40 cu.yd.        $1.60       $64.00
                   Wainwright curbing           140 ft.         $0.206       $28.82
                   Name stone                                                $10.00
                   Extra work                                                 $6.74
                   GRAND TOTAL                                            $4,334.57



Patents and Local Access to Bridge Building

          To explain the relationship between Frank H. Shaw and state agencies that contracted
him and his bridge designs, we have to understand the historic context-the history of patents
                                                                        BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                             HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                     (Page 22)

and the process of selecting a particular bridge to be built-that eventually led to the system of
favored relationships that Shaw enjoyed. It is necessary to understand the debate going on in the
United States at the time when concrete bridges were feverishly being built. The struggle in the
early years actually was between standardized design presented by independent contractors, such
as Daniel B. Luten, and state engineering offices where engineers produced their own designs.

       Starting in the 1890s in the United States, patents for concrete bridges began to be
secured especially by major holders of concrete bridge patents. For example in the 1890s,
patents were held by Joseph Melan, Fritz von Emperger, Edwin Thacher, Indiana's Daniel B.
Luten, who had over forty by 1916, and James B. Marsh, who patented his unique concrete
bowstring bridge. These patents were for different styles and what ensued was a debate about
how bridges should be built in the United States, should they be offered by independent
companies or by governmental offices that determined standard types, shapes and styles?

       A number of methods were used in the early days to pick the best bridges. Before an
impartial system of bridge selection evolved, a debate raged in America pitting the independent
contractor and his design against the state's designers. In a few words, the state wanted to
produce standardized designs usually dominated by a few engineers employed by the state, while
independent contractors complained that they and their patented designs were being shut out of
the business of bridge design and construction.

       Engineers working for the government drafted bridges with detailed and standardized
specifications that left almost no room for the designer and in the long run for any innovation.
This method produced bridges that were costly, excessively heavy, but were designed to
counteract the unaccomplished job skills of companies whose low bids won the contract.

       Another method employed in Europe picked a bridge design that showed the best
planning knowledge and building techniques but which did not necessarily come from the lowest
bidder. Unfortunately, this approach did not always guarantee that those evaluating the best
engineered design were technically qualified to do so or that governmental officials were not
motivated by corruption to be partial.

      What eventually developed in the United States was a method that Americans believed
emphasized ingenuity in design and construction resulting in a bridge that supposedly was better
                                                                         BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                              HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                      (Page 23)

and cheaper. This method had the following requirements that were prepared by the regional
engineer: a mandatory general plan setting out how a bridge should perform by presenting sets of
specifications for loadings and capacities, external dimensions, and the structure's principal
architectural features. These specifications, dimensions and features applied to all bidders. The
bidders, in reference to the mandatory plan of the regional authority, were required to submit
drawings specifying the thickness of bridge parts, and detailing reinforcement schemes. The
contractors were also required to guarantee their work, the construction materials used, and their
design for one year. The whole process was meant to produce an economical and expertly
designed and built bridge.

        Consequently, this method produced a unique relationship of consultation between elected
officials, the regional engineer, and the contractor. In the case of Frank H. Shaw, it developed
into a special relationship between an authorizing governmental agency and the county engineer
as the preferred provider of bridge designs. The relationship suggests that he held a monopoly
over whose designs the county would choose. Further research into this subject should be
carried out to show what percentage of bridges was built by Shaw as compared to his
competitors. Shaw's status developed from the special relationship with the county that gave
him a unique opportunity to create a historic legacy of bridge design and construction that exists
to this day. Through such a close and favored relationship that the firm of Frank H. Shaw
enjoyed with the county, his monopoly may have limited access to the market by other
contracting firms wishing to make their contributions to the infrastructure of Lancaster County
through new designs and construction methods.

         In any case, the Big Chickies Creek was hailed as a rarity in 1931 when Lancaster's The
Sunday News presented a photograph of a relatively new looking bridge fifteen years after it was
built, stating it was an: "Artistic bridge. This unusual concrete structure spans the Little Chiques
Creek [which was an error since it spanned Big Chickies Creek] between Sporting Hill and
Lancaster Junction and is one of the few of its type in Lancaster County."48



SIGNIFICANCE

48
     Th e Sunday News, Lancaster, PA, August 30, 1931.
                                                                        BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                             HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                     (Page 24)

       The tied-through reinforced concrete arch Big Chickies Bridge, built in 1916, is a
historically and technologically significant early and rare example of just two found in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of a rainbow type tied design bridge with diagonal members.
Perhaps in attempting to avoid any problems with patents issued to J.B. Marsh, the Shaws
created a concrete bridge that has unique features found in the previous era's iron bridges with
their diagonal stress elements in the arch. Although the Big Chickies Bridge has not been
previously evaluated for National Register Eligibility, the Pennsylvania Historic and Museum
Commission did determine in 1993 that its exact twin in equally good condition at Weaverland
was eligible for the National Register.
                                                                      BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                           HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                   (Page 25)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Frank H. Shaw Dies; Was Former Water Works Supt." Obituary in Lancaster Intelligencer
Journal, 15 May 1950.

"Frank H. Shaw is Dead at 78." Obituary in Lancaster New Era, 15 May 1950.

"Penn Township,"
http://www.penn.co.lancaster.pa.us/penn/cwp/view.asp?a=3&Q=467386&pennNav=1

Bridge Dockets. Commissioners' Office, Lancaster County Court House. One large and one
small volume. Found in the Lancaster County Engineer's Office, Lancaster.

Bridgens, H.F. and Assistants. Bridgens' Atlas of Lancaster Co. Pennsylvania. Lancaster: D.S.
Bare, 1864. Collection of the Lancaster County Courthouse, Office of the Recorder of Deeds.

Ellis, Franklin and Samuel Evans. History of Lancaster County. Philadelphia: Everts & Peck,
1883.

Everts, L.H. and D.J. Stewart. Historical Atlas of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Philadelphia: Hunter Publisher, 1875.

Graves and Steinberger. Atlas of Surveys of the County of Lancaster, State of Pennsylvania.
Boston and Philadelphia: Graves and Steinberger, 1899.
Harrington, John Lyle. "Recent Developments in Bridge Superstructures." Proceedings of the
Engineers' Society of Western Pennsylvania 46, no. 3 (Mar. 1930): 63.
Heisey, M. Luther. "The Water Supply of Lancaster." Journal of the Lancaster County
Historical Society 41, no.1 (1937): 34.

Jones, Frances A. "Benson Street Concrete Bowstring Bridge." HAER No. OH-50. Historic
American Engineering Record, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1986.
Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress.
Lancaster City Directory. Lancaster: R.L. Polk & Co., Publishers, Vols. 1905, 1916-1924.

Lancaster County Historic Transportation Cultural Resource Study. Harrisburg: Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, 1995.
Luten, Daniel B. "Concrete-Steel Bridges." Municipal Engineering XXIII, no. 3 (September
1902): 156.
----------. "Highway Bridges of Concrete." Municipal Engineering XIX, no. 6 (December 1900):
388.
Manheim Revisited. Manheim: Manheim Historical Society, 2000.

Marsh, James B. Patent: Reinforced Arch Bridge. Patent No. 1,035,026. Patented August 6,
1912.
                                                                     BIG CHICKIES BRIDGE
                                                                          HAER No. PA-630
                                                                                  (Page 26)

Pennsylvania Historic Bridge Inventory & Elevation, BMS# 36723008750202 (Big Chickies
Bridge II). Prepared by A.G. Lichtenstein & Associates, Inc., Paramus, New Jersey, 2000.
Peterson, Nadine and Connie L. Torbeck. Historic Resources Survey and Determination of
Eligibility Report. S.R. 4003, Section 002, Bridge Replacement Project, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. Report prepared by Cultural Heritage Research Services, Inc., North Wales,
Pennsylvania, for the United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, 1995.
Roddy, Justin. Physical and Industrial Geography of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Lancaster: The New Era Printing Co., 1916.
Ross, Helen P. "Walnut Lane Bridge," HAER No. PA-504. Historic American Engineering
Record (HAER), National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. Prints and Photographs
Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., 1998. Revised and expanded by Justin M.
Spivey, 2001.
Scott, Joshua. Map of Lancaster County Pennsylvania Respectfully Dedicated to the Inhabitants
by Joshua Scott. Lancaster, 1824. Collection of the Library of Congress.
Shaw, Percy A. "A Reinforced Concrete Through Girder Bridge." Engineering Record 64, no.
26 (December 23, 1911): 744-5.
Spivey, Justin M. "Big Conestoga Creek Bridge No. 12." HAER No. PA-500. Historic
American Engineering Record (HAER, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., 1998.
"Spring Street Bridge." HAER No. WI-37. Historic American Engineering Record (HAER),
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1987. Prints and Photographs Division,
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
Thacher, Edwin M. "Concrete-Steel Bridge Construction." Engineering News XLII, no. 12
(September 21, 1899): 179.
The Sunday News. Lancaster, PA. May 12, 1946. p. 10.
Tumaure, F.E. and E.R. Maurer. Principles of Reinforced Concrete Construction, 2nd rev. ed.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1913.
USGS New Holland Quad, 1908 Edition (surveyed in 1905 and 1906).
von Emperger, Fritz. "The Development and Recent Improvement of Concrete-Iron Highway
Bridges." Transactions, American Society of Civil Engineers 703, Vol. XXXI, 1894.
