Gohas Brook Bridge                                            HAER No. NH-9
State Highway #28 (South
  Willow Street), 1.2 miles north of the
  Londonderry/Manchester town line,
  spanning the Cohas Brook
Manchester
Hillsborough County
New Hampshire                                                                 Jl-




                                  PHOTOGRAPHS

                   WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                     HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                  MID-ATLANTIC REGION NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
                          DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
                       PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA 19106
                            HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
»
                                      Cohas Brook Bridge

                                        HAER No. NH-9



    Location:                 Cohas Brook Bridge
                              State Highway #28 (South Willow Street), 1.2 miles
                                north of the Londonderry/Manchester town line,
                                spanning the Cohas Brook
                              Manchester
                              Hillsborough County
                              New Hampshire

                              USGS Manchester South Quadrangle, Universal Transverse
                                Mercator Coordinates: Zone 19
                                Easting:  3-01-500
                                Northing: 47-57-500

    Date of Construction:      1929

    Present Owner:             City of Manchester, New Hampshire

    Present Use:               Highway crossing over Cohas Brook. The bridge is to
                               be replaced by a contemporary structure to accommodate
                               increased traffic loads. Projected date of demolition
                               of the present bridge is 1986.

    Significance       The Cohas Brook Bridge is significant as the first example
                       of an open spandrel, reinforced concrete, parabolic arch
                       bridge erected in New Hampshire, and one of only three,
                       apparently, in the state. The structure is significant for
                       its association with the designer, Harold E. Langley, an
                       important bridge engineer with the New Hampshire Department
                       of Public Works and Highways during the second quarter of
                       the twentieth century; for its proximity to the site of
                       several earlier crossings over the Cohas Brook; and for its
                       association with the development of the city and state
                       transportation network.

    Project Information:      Demolition of the Cohas Brook Bridge scheduled for
                              1986, funded by the Federal Highway Administration and
                              New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways.
                                                         Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                         HAER No. NH-9
                                                         (Page 2)



Project Information, continued:

                        Federal Highway Administration
                        Region 1, N.H. Division Office
                        Federal Building
                        55 Pleasant Street, Room 219
                        Concord, New Hampshire 03301

                                     with

                        N. H. Department of Public Works and Highways
                        John 0. Morton Building
                        Concord, New Hampshire 03301

Mitigative documentation prepared by:

                        Closs Planning Consultants
                        Four Bicentennial Square
                        Concord, New Hampshire 03301

                        Principal:     Christopher W. Closs, MNRP

                                     with

                        Jane M. Porter
                        Consultant
                        101 Crescent Way
                        Portsmouth, New Hampshire 03801

                        November 30, 1984

Transmitted by:         Jean P. Yearby, HAER, 1985
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 3)



Site and Bridge Description

The Cohas Brook Bridge is located in the city of Manchester, near the
Merrimack River, in the southeastern portion of New Hampshire. The bridge is
located approximately 3.5 miles south of Manchester's central business
district.

The winding Cohas Brook is seven miles in length, running roughly east to west
with a drop of about 125' from its origin in Lake Massabesic (elevation 251')
to its outlet in the Merrimack River approximately 1.5 miles downsteam from
the bridge.

Elevation of the bridge deck is 200'. The immediate site is sparsely
developed and is approximately 1.2 miles north of the Londonderry town line.

The bridge, which is oriented on a north-south axis, crosses the Cohas Brook
perpendicular to th stream channel. The banks of the stream have been altered
where the bridge crosses it; extensive fill and rip-rap on the north bank
conceal most of the principal abutment. The south bank was filled similarly
and has a steep grade. The stream bed is 22' 11" below the crown of the arch
rib intrados. The depth of the stream appeared to be no more than one to two
feet in September of 1984; vegetation along the edge suggests that the stream
rarely rises more than an additional two or three feet.

The banks of the brook are wooded. Immediately southeast of the bridge,
vegetation has been entirely removed where a new commercial storage warehouse
is being built. Southwest of the bridge, Perimeter Road extends off Harvey
Road through the industrial park to the Manchester Airport, the runways of
which extend to less than a mile from the bridge.

The Cohas Brook Bridge, seen from an off-road vantage point upstream, presents
an attractive, understated expression of structure and materials, effectively
contrasting with the wooded borders of the stream. However, the usual view of
the bridge, from the Highway #28 approaches, reveal only the simple paneled
rails. To the traveling motorist, the bridge is not a visual landmark since
its structure form is depressed within the stream channel.

The bridge is in excellent condition; minor spalling is evident on edges and
corners of structural members. Some exfoliation of reinforced concrete deck
railing has occurred. Bridge rating is H-15; the structure remains unposted.

General Dimensions of Structure

New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highway Bridge Division files
record 1929 as the year of construction of the Cohas Brook Bridge. The bridge
was included under "Bridges Under Construction, December 15,, 1929" in
New Hampshire Highways (7:9) and was listed among "Bridge Reconstructed in the
Department's Annual Report for 1929/1930. The bridge structure bears no date
or public dedication tablet.
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 4)



    Overall dimensions:

         Overall bridge length         139'   8"
         Main span length               61'   4"
         Approach slab length           27'   8"
         Approach slab length           26'   8"
         Approach slab length           24*   0"

         Bridge (outside) width         27' 4"
         Bridge deck width              24 * 0"

         Finish graded to stream bed    29' 5'

         Ribs:

                 rise                   16* 8-1/2"
                 spacing                20' 0" (center to center)
                 width                   6' 0'
                 thickness at crown      V 4"
                 thickness at spring     4* 6-1/8"

         Deck slab thickness           8" at curb

The Cohas Brook Bridge is constructed upon two principal abutments. The twin
arch ribs of the main span spring from concrete abutments measuring 12' 6" in
height and 5* 6" in depth. These structures rest upon paired footings
(buried) measuring 14' 0" by 11' 2-1/2" by 3' 6" in height. Fieldstone
rip~rap is arranged to protect these structures below the spring line. A
reinforced horizontal concrete shear panel connects each pair of abutment
piers up to the base of the twin arch ribs. Reinforcing steel and concrete
pass through and behind each abutment pier to distribute lateral thrust to the
entire footing.

The four massive reinforced piers rised above the abutments, supporting the
bridge deck at opposite ends of the main span.

The three approach spans are supported by two end bents and an intermediate
bent (north). Depths of the rectangular footings vary; each is joined with a
reinforced web or lateral brace above the footing.

Design Elements

The Cohas Brook Bridge is an open spandrel, twin parabolic arch bridge
constructed with reinforced concrete. The north abutment of the main span and
the piers and bents, all utilize open reinforcement; the south abutment is
constructed simply with mass concrete. The wings are the butterfly type and
also utilize reinforced concrete.
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 5)



The reinforcing system of the Cohas Brook Bridge is probably not innovative,
judging by its similarity to systems illustrated in several post-World War I
manuals (interview with Howard Newlon, Research Council of the Virginia
Department of Transportation and Highways). The system consists of a
combination of square and round rods, bars, lines, and bands l/2"-l" in
thickness, concentrated in grids about 2" from the concrete surfaces* In the
rib arches, pairs of hooked ties link the reinforcements of the intrados and
the extrados every 12"; hook rods are employed at 18" intervals in the
spandrel posts; V-stirrups are used in the base of the deck slab of the arched
span.

The roadway originally consisted of a monolithic concrete wearing course
utilizing 1/2" bituminous felt expansion joints. Sliding surfaces were
interfaced with three plies of roofing felt. Curbings and the solid panel
railing are of reinforced concrete. The roadway surface has been resurfaced
with asphalt.

In its design, the Cohas Brook Bridge is firmly, though conservatively, rooted
in the mainstresam of reinforced concrete arch bridge design as it evolved
during the first three decades of the twentieth century. The Pont Adolphe
Bridge at Luxenbourg (1903), a stone masonry arch, is cited by Elizabeth Mock
(...Bridges, p. 88) as the European prototype for the twin-ribbed open
spandrel, arched form. This bridge form, using the reinforced concrete
system, made its first appearance in the United States before 1910, and it was
widely used in the following two decades. The reinforced concrete, filled
spandrel, barrel arch type continued to be built through the 1920s.

The twin-ribbed, open spandrel, reinforced concrete arch bridge is
well-represented nationally, though not in New Hampshire. Carl Condit
(American Building Art..., pp. 198-207) traces the evolution of this type from
the 1906-08 Walnut Lane Bridge in Philadelphia through the next decades when
more extensive arch rib reinforcement was employed. No systematic tabulation
of this bridge type has yet been undertaken on a nationwide basis (interviews
with Bruce Eberle, Federal Highway Administration), but the number is
estimated to be in the hundreds, with concentrations in the midwest and far
west.

New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways records and publications
(Annual and Biennial Reports and New Hampshire Highways) and the 1982 "New
Hampshire Historic Bridge Inventory (Sverdrup & Parcel and Associates, Inc.)
reveals that earlier reinforced concrete arch highway bridges contained filled
spandrel, barrel (rather than rib) arches. These were either minor spans with
I-beam reinforcing, or were Luten arches with grids of reinforcing steel,
built by the Luten Bridge Company in the wake of the November 1927 floods,
which washed away many northern New Hampshire bridges.
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 6)



The other examples of this bridge type in the state included the still extant
Vilas Bridge (1930) (#062/052), designed by the New Hampshire Highway
Department to span the Connecticut River between North Walpole, New Hampshire,
and Bellows Falls, Vermont. The two arched spans measure 107' 6.75" overall.
Only one other example, the 120', now altered arched span over the Sugar River
in Newport (#085/101), erected in 1933, was identified in a search of
Department files. In a telephone interview, Roger Blaisdell, retired
long-time bridge inspector for the Department, could recall no other examples,
although he suggested the possibility of private or railroad bridges not under
the Department's jurisdiction.

The open spandrel, ribbed arch, reinforced concrete bridge type represented
advantages over the filled spandrel arch bridge, depending on the rise of the
arch, length of the span, and the nature of the bed for the piers. The open
spandrel type afforded significant economy in the quantity of materials
required, as well as in reduction of dead weight, factors discussed in such
texts as J. A. L. Waddell's Economic of Bridge Work (pp. 222-223). The high
cost of skilled labor required to build the forms for the arches, and the
development of alternative combinations of steel and concrete, led to the
decline of both types of concrete arches by the 1930s.

Increasingly sophisticateed reinforcing systems for all structural members
resulted in designs which featured extremely slender arch ribs and spandrel
bents, such as those found in California bridges of the 1920s and early 1930s
(Conditj American Building Art.*., pp. 198-207). The design of the Cohas
Brook Bridge does not reflect this slenderness; it relies, more traditionally,
on mass, although it achieves a balance of scale among the abutments, paired
parabolic arch ribs, and the eight pairs of spandrel bents. There is a clear
expresssion of the structural role of these forms, with no attempt to disguise
the concrete as masonry.

The threes approach spans - reinforced concrete slabs - are borne on broad
segmental arch spandrel beams between abutments; these are repeated on the
main span with a tighter configuration between spandrel bents. These
segmental arch spandrel beams are all reinforced, and, while serving a
structural purpose, form a visual transition from the verticals of the
spandrel bents above the arch ribs, to the horizontal deck slab.

Engineer/Designer

The designer of the Cohas Brook Bridge was Harold E. Langley, whose initials
appear on the principal elevation drawing of the original plans of record (six
sheets), filed with the Bridge Design Division, New Hampshire Department of
Public Works and Highways, Concord, New Hampshire. Sheet #1, dated Auust 20,
1929, presents plans and elevation designs of the bridge, and was approved
September 17, 1929, by John W. Childs, Bridge Engineer for the Department. No
information about Harold E. Langley is on file at the Department. He has
continued to live in Concord since his retirement in 1961. Mr. Langley
declined to be interviewed.
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 7)



In a brief, informal conversation in September 1984, Jane Cavanaugh, Langley's
stepdaughter, noted that the engineer had designed all of the bridges spanning
the Connecticut River. Confirmation of this statement was not possible. It
is difficullt to determine the primary designers of major spans; plans of
record typically bear the initials of several individuals within the
Department and must be approved by the Bridge Engineer.

Records of the Registrar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
disclosed that Harold E. Langley was enrolled as a Civil Engineering student
in the class of 1919. He withdrew in 1917 during his second year, evidently
without taking the highway and bridge design courses offered to third and
fourth year students. Concord City Directories shows that Langley was a
transit man for the New Hampshire Highway Department by the early 1920s; and
by 1929, the year the Cohas Bridge was erected, he was "assistant engineer,
State Highway Department." By 1940, he was designing engineer for the
Department and, by 1943, had risen to hold the principal position of Bridge
Engineer for the Bridge Division.

Langley does not appear to have been involved in the design of the reinforced
concrete, open spandrel Vilas Bridge (1930) at North Walpole, New
Hampshire/Bellows Falls, Vermont, or with the bridge over the Sugar River in
Newport, New Hampshire. His initials do appear, however, on the drawings for
the bridge at Stewartstown (1930), one of three steel arches spanning the
Connecticut River. The Piscataqua River Bridge (#251/108) at Portsmouth, a
2,798' two-level Warren truss with a lift span, then the State's longest span
and a major project for the Department, was built (1940) while Langley was
designing engineer for the Bridge Division-

Like the Cohas Brook Bridge, these bridges were all evaluated in Sverdrup &
Parcel's 1982 Historic Bridge Inventory as eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places for the quality of their design and appropriate use of
technology and materials.

Two of the steel bridges spanning the Connecticut River, each with a span of
425', were included in the 1943 edition of George Hoo]s and W. W. Kinne's
textbook, Movable and Long Span Steel Bridges, for which Langley served as
junior editor under R. R. Zipprodt (pp. 374 a-c). These structures,
the Orford and Chesterfield Bridges, were each given the Award of Merit by the
American Institute of Steel Construction for their respective years, as
"Most Beautiful Steel Bridge, Class C."

The six sheets of the plans of records for the bridge are on file at the New
Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways, Bridge Design Division,
Concord, New Hampshire. Photographic reproductions of the six sheets are
included in the this report. These include:
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page S)



    Sheet 1   Upstream Elevation and Plan
    Sheet 2   Downstream Elevation
    Sheet 3   Details of Columns for Arch Span
    Sheet 4   Details of Bents
    Sheet 5   Slab and Girder Details
    Sheet 6   Concrete Placement Diagram
              Elevation Diagram

There is no evidence that the actual construction deviated from these designs.

Builder, Contractor, Suppliers

Files of the New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways Bridge
Division record the Robie Construction Company of Manchester, New Hampshire,
as contractor for the four spans of the Cohas Brook Bridge. New Hampshire
Highways (7:9, December 1929) indicates that this company contracted to build
the bridge at a cost of $28,648.00. There is no record of subcontracts for
construction or supplies.

The president of the company in 1929 was William H. Lawes; he had been
president of the New Hampshire Cement Construction Company, which merged with
the Robie Consolidated Construction Company in 1924. A 1920 advertisement in
the Manchester Directory for the New Hampshire Cement Construction Company
announced reinforced concrete bridges as a specialty. No record could be
found of New Hampshire Highway Department bridges constructed by either
company prior to 1927, when Robie Construction was reported as contractor for
a concrete filled arch bridge in Campton, New Hampshire (New Hampshire
Highways, 5:3). The company was also contractor for the important reinforced
concrete, open spandrel, arch rib Vilas Bridge (1930; #062/062) over the
Connecticut River in North Walpole, New Hampshire, according to Department
files.

An interview with William Eaton, vice president of the Robie Company,
disclosed that the company records and photographs pertaining to the Cohas
Brook Bridge and other structures for which the company contracted during that
period were destroyed by fire in the early 1980s.

No alterations or additions to the reinforced concrete bridge structure are
evident or recorded with the Department, although periodic resurfacing of the
roadway and patching of spalled concrete areas as part of routine maintenance
may be presumed.

Role of Bridge in Local and Regional Transportation Systems

The Cohas Brook was a significant natural feature which offered water-power
and an abundant food supply; the earliest white settlement in Manchester was
established along its banks by 1722. Saws and grist mills were established by
settlers who had migrated northward from Massachusetts along the Merrimack
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 9)



River. John B. Clarke (Manchester, p. 77) asserts that the first Manchester
bridge "of any importance" spanned the Cohas as early as 1738, near the site
of the present bridge.

Early nineteenth-century development of textile mills at the Amoskeag Falls on
the Merrimack, several miles upstream, caused expanded development to shift
away from the Cohas Brook.

The 1858 map of Hillsborough County (which includes Manchester), by
J. C. Grace, Jr., shows a residential cluster near the roads which led south
from the bridge crossing, with another concentration at the outlet into the
Merrimack about one and one-half miles downstream. Farms bordered the road
north into the rapidly developing city. Downstream or west of thee crossing
was a pond, created as the impoundment for E. S. Harvey's lumber mill,
bisected by the tracks of the Manchester and Lawrence Railroad. Several other
Harveys (lumbermen and farmers) had houses along the present Harvey Road,
which forks southwest off the main road, immediately south of the bridge. A
single brick gable-roofed dwelling of Greek Revival style, now converted for
offices is the only above ground nineteenth-century architectural resource
surviving within the immediate environs of the bridge.

The Cohas Brook continued to serve as a significant source of waterpower
through the early 1870s, when the city began drawing its water supply from
Massabesic Lake, thus significantly altering the volume of flow. The Derry
Mills, organized in 1865, built three mill structures on the falls near the
mouth of the Cohas, and in 1873 employed 160 workers in the manufacture of
woolen cassimeres, stockings, and shoddy (Clarke, Manchester, p. 305). Hurd's
1892 Atlas shows that both Harvey lumbermill and the textile operation at the
mouth of the Cohas had been converted to steam power, and the Mill Pond
breached (p* 49).

In the early years of the twentieth century, existing roads and bridges, built
for draft animal traffic, began to be traversed by motor vehicles - which led
to the development of a permanent, hard-surfaced, statewide roadway system.
The Cohas Brook Bridge is representative of the technology, both in design and
materials, of the structures which evolved in response to modern motorized
transport.

A 1912 report on New Hampshire's highways, prepared by Fred Hoyt for the
Office of Public Roads of the United States Department of Agriculture, shows
that the present Highway #28 had not yet been designated a trunk line, but the
Department's Biennial Reports for 1915/1916 and 1917/1918 record work on
segments of the road, which was called the Rockingham Road Trunk Line. The
work consisted of drainage improvements, resurfacing, and perhaps widening.
The realignment and raising of the Cohas Brook crossing to its present
configuration appears to have been done concurrently with construction of the
existing bridge in 1929.
                                                      Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                      HAER No. NH-9
                                                      (Page 10)



The record indicates, somewhat obliquely, that the previous bridge was
replaced because of increased traffic. A 1927 report (U. S. Department of
Agriculture, Bureau of Public Roads, ...Survey ofm Transportation on the State
Highways of New Hampshire; map opposite p. 29) designated Highway #28 as an
artery carrying "major" traffic loads - the highest traffic volume assigned in
the report, which was based on 1926 traffic surveys. The highway then carried
an average daily load of 1500 vehicles (map opposite p. 58).

The previous structure is described (but not illustrated) in Bridge Design
Division files. It was a three-span bridge, 72' overall, consisting of
I-beams with plank floor, and two concrete piers with a 24' roadway, the same
width as the 1929 replacement bridge. The description of its design suggests
that it was probably built near the turn of the century. Granite abutments
which remain extant several rods downstream from (west of) the present bridge,
and which are capped with concrete, identify the location of the earlier
structure.

The present bridge was built on the eve of the Great Depression, during a
period when Manchester was already experiencing the impact of the textile
industry's exodus to the South. The construction of the bridge coincided with
a period of expansion in state participation in highway and bridge building,
made possible by growing revenues from licensing fees and gasoline taxes, and
by the steady increase in federal highway funding to the states begun in
1916* State regulations prohibited state involvement in construction of
bridge spans of more than ten feet (except by special legislation), until
after the introduction of federal monies (Biennial Report, 1919/1920, p. 17).
While many of the State's most important bridges were designed and/or built by
out-of-state firms during this period, the Cohas Brook Bridge was designed by
the Department and built by a Manchester firm - reflecting growing New
Hampshire sophistication.

In the late twentieth century, replacement of the Cohas Brook Bridge has
become necessary because of the increasing traffic volume and changing land
use. No longer a principal interstate thoroughfare, this section of
Highway #28 now serves as an extension of South Willow Street, which leads
south out of Manchester and provides access for the recently-developed,
sprawling Mall of New Hampshire on the outskirts of the city. A short
distance away from the bridge, on Harvey Road, are the Manchester Airport and
Grenier Field Industrial Park. Increased bridge width and capacity is
necessary for safe, efficient travel for freight traffic destined for nearby
Interstate 293.

According to Department records, ownership of the former Highway #28 bridge
over the Cohas Brook was transferred from the city of Manchester to the State
of New Hampshire in 1929, prior to the construction of the present bridge.
Department records show that on May 1, 1974, the urban compact boundary line
which separated the portion of Highway #28 owned and maintained by the city of
Manchester from the section owned and maintained by the State of New
Hampshire, was moved south from Huse Road in Manchester to the intersection of
                                                       Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                       HAER No. NH-9
                                                       (Page 11)



Highway #28 and Harvey Road, immediately south of the bridge. This action
transferred the bridge, in effect, to city ownership, although the actual
conveyance of the title of the structure is not recorded in the Hillsborough
County Registry of Deeds.

Sources of Information

A.   Original Architectural Drawings:

          New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways, Bridge Design
          Division, Concord, New Hampshire (copies attached)

B.   Early Views:    None located

C    Interviews:

          Blaisdell, Roger, retired bridge inspector for the New Hampshire
               Department of Public Works and Highways. By telephone to
               Meredith, New Hampshire, October 11, 1984, by Jane M. Porter.

          Cavanaugh, Jane, stepdaughter of Harold E. Langley, designer of the
               Cohas Brook Bridge. By telephone to Concord, New Hampshire,
               September 21, 1984, by Jane M. Porter.

          Eaton, William, vice president of Robie Construction Company,
               Manchester, New Hampshire. By telephone, September 24, 1984,
               by Jane M. Porter.

          Eberle, Bruce, Federal Highway Administration, Environmental Division,
               Washington, D. C. By telephone, October 24, 1984, by Jane M.
               Porter.

          Newlon, Howard, Director of Research Council, Virginia Department of
               Transportation and Highways. By telephone to Alexandria,
               Virginia, October 24, 1984.

D.   Bibliography:

     1.   Primary and unpublished sources:

          Artemel, Janice G. (subconsultant for Sverdrup & Parcel and
               Associates). "Highway Bridges of New Hampshire: A Historic
               Overview." April 1983. (New Hampshire Department of Public
               Works and Highways, Bridge Design Division, Concord,
               New Hampshire)
                                                    Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                    HAER No. NH-9
                                                    (Page 12)



     New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways, Bridge
          Design Division, Concord, New Hampshire. Files. These include
          card files with construction data and photographs of New
          Hampshire bridges within the Department's jurisdiction, and
          files containing the design sheets for bridges built by or for
          the Department. Also consulted was the file related to Sverdrup
          & Parcel and Associates "New Hampshire Historic Bridge
          Inventory" [see below], containing working lists for New
          Hampshire bridges, both on- and off-system*

     Sverdrup & Parcel and Associates, Inc. "New Hampshire Historic
          Bridge Inventory." 1982. Prepared for the New Hampshire
          Department of Public Works and Highways, this inventory consists
          of reports on 149 New Hampshire highway bridges. Inclusion of a
          bridge in the inventory represents a consensus as to historic
          merit by the consultants, the State Historic Preservation
          Officer, and the Department of Public Works and Highways.
          [New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways, Bridge
          Design Division, Concord, New Hampshire]

2.   Secondary and published sources:

          Chace, J. C, Jr. Map of Hillsborough County, 1858. Reprint
               edition, West Chesterfield, N.H.: Old Maps, 1982.
                [Manchester Historic Association, Manchester, New Hampshire^

          Clark, John B.   Manchester.   Manchester, N.H.:     John B. Clarke,
               1875.

         Concord [New Hampshire] City Directory. Publisher and frequency
              of publication varies. Consulted for years 1920 - 1965.

         Condit, Carl W. American Building Art, The Twentieth Century.
              New York: Oxford University Press, 1961.

         Engineering News, 68:25 (December 19, 1912).        Article on Larimer
              Avenue Concrete Arch Bridge, p. 1125.

         Engineering News-Record, 90:4 (January 25, lk923). Article on
              Cappelan Memorial Bridge, Minneapolis, Minn., pp. 148-152.

         Hool, George A., and Kinne, W. S., Movable and Long Span Steel
              Bridges. Rev. 2nd ed., edited by R. R. Zipprodt and
              H. E. Langley. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1943.

         Hoyt, Charles, C. E. New Hampshire Highways. Report
              (U. S. Department of Agriculture, Office of Public Roads,
              Bulletin #42). Washington, D. C. : Government Printing
              Office.
                                                   Cohas Brook Bridge
                                                   HAER No. NH-9
                                                   (Page 13)



          Hurd, D. H. and Co. Hurd's Atlas of the Towns and Cities of the
               State of New Hampshire, n.p. D. H. Hurd and Co., 1892.
               Map of Manchester, New Hampshire, p. 49.

          Manchester [New Hampshire] City Directory. Publisher and
               frequency of publication varies. Consulted for years
               1851-1855 and 1918-1932.

         Mock, Elizabeth B., The Architecture of Bridges.
              New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1949. Discussion of
              reinforced concrete arch bridges, p. 88.

          New Hampshire. State Department of Highways.   Annual Report.
               1925/1926 - 1929/1930.

          New Hampshire. State Department of Highways.   Biennal Report.
               1905/1906 - 1919/1920.

          New Hampshire Highways, vols. 3 - 9 (1925 - 1931).

          Potter, C. E. The History of Manchester. Manchester, N.H.:
               C. E. Potter, 1856. [Manchester Historic Association,
               Manchester, N. H.] History of Cohas Brook, pp. 655-661.

          Thorp, L. Ashton. Manchester of Yesterday. Manchester, N. H.:
               Granite State Press, 1939- Use of Lake Massabesic for
               Manchester water system, p. 494.

          U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Public Roads. Report
               of a Survey of Transportation on the State Highways of
               New Hampshire. 1927.

         Waddell, J. A. L. Economics of Bridge Work.
              New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1921.

         Watson, Wilbur J. Bridge Architecture.
              New York: Wm. Helburn, Inc, 1927.

E.   Likely Sources Not Yet Investigated:   None known

F.   Supplemental Material:   None
                 "V
                                                                                "♦ ^S^^S5 N                                            COHAS BROOK BRIDGE
                                                                        ;. A„i/V_^-< s  *^v                                            HAER No. NH-9 (Page 14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          \      >
                                     -Ui


                          ^ ;fc                               .C'TI.
                                                                                                         It
!                                                                                                                           AJ
    ^4                                         * *i>ra;                                                                      fc-tt
i   1 t5*:
             M                                                          r 4                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                              v. >'        A<
^ • nu,H4
;
    \                                                                                                                            aubStuti
                                                                                                                                                                                                          **5                 ^
                                                                               ;-'-0>               ^                                  •Mfrr              , Traiic

     Carthagina                                                                                                                  •V ' o

                                                                                        ,^<
                  Giging*.f3M3'
                                                                                      €/? <o
                                                                               ^
                                                                               '•M^                           >v
             ^URCKANW 1              1     !                                                             X?                                  , v. -

                                                                                        ^<
                                                                                                                                                      V
                                     IS
                                                     \\ v.                                                V c-
                                                                                                                   \ \-—
                                                                                                                           p*                             '$a<&
                                                                                                                                                                       \                                             y r?^ ■s-v
                                                                                                                                                                            V,
                                                                         ./
                                               >9!     P\\
                                                                                                                     v/                                                       ''^sB*
                                                                                                                                                                                          ^3S-

                                                                                                                                                                                                          W
^                                                A   14]                                                                                              AAtW
                                                                                                                                                      Wei
                                                                                                                                                                            ?30O^^f

                                                     ■V &b                     "fc            zrz^f       X                                                      rr:<-*

                                ;u             ->«
                                                     Al           <7
                                                           \w%f
                                                            Fails
                                                                          <\                      -•*:                                                1        'ft1.

                 /                                     l\<*                                                                                                     1                   '**

                                                 :.^o/                                                                                                                                                                            v4~
                                                                                        ^^                                                                                                                    tC&

                                                                                                                           -Off/ itf
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ^                           |\K
                                                                       *iv,.
             ^7                                C \ v ' *\\
                                                                                                                                        ^                    A
                                                                                                              W                                                                       '<3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                               ^
                                                                                        <*T50=S
                                                                                                                                                                                            */"
                                                                                                                                                                                                  m       --"V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MSC Hester


                    ~<?tto-                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                  ■?5£?,
                                                                                                                                                                                     4*- -':■-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %0_Sl

                                                             \«dl                                                                       -^
                                                                                                                                                                           tt'^i,                     :
                                                                   .■^
                                                                                                                                                                                                       \\^Wri
                                                      ,\\
                                                                                                                                                                            ("\

    I »T°^mfc^   pj?&%
                                                                                                                                       BRIDGE LOCATION
         /W-fi
        \J\
                                      i*=. a                                                                   /-                      USGS MANCHESTER SOUTH QUADRANGLE
                              Radio Tower
                                (WFEA).
                                   CTrt

    X
                                 V                                                                       ^
        X>A.                                     ftiJIfi-                       ^J                                                                           ... Vv; \ c- x, <.   L. . K                             %:
                                                COHAS BROOK BRIDGE
                                                HAER No. NH-9 (Page 15)


      Site plan with north arrow
                                                                SKETCH SITE PLAN
■c-

          N                            4 '•ft




                                         111




                       Flouj
                                                CoKas       "Brook

                                   r
iC                  Ak«*'i&r*\/
                      A tw-^ «.€«+■'




,o
                                                              Manchester 191/100
                         COHAS BROOK BRIDGE
                         HAER No. NH-9 (Page 16)

                        UPSTREAM (EAST) ELEVATION




ii^—i»=—~fc.   '_-.„.




                                                    mm
                                                                                        COHAS BROOK BRIDGE
              -    ■>■ t                                                                HAER No. NH-9 (Page 17)

                                                                                    BRIDGE DECK SECTION DETAILS


                                           /z-o


              W5?.           - .
                                                                                                                is;/. F*ftOVJ.
                   •t

                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                       ... *.    *   _ .'U    f
                            ^^V-'/x>.."::r. "./>'. :?.:-:>:A .S


                                                                                                                             "Arch Span.

                                   2 SJSCT/OS* A/=>/=>KOACHS*
cv--5                                                                                      <3 p/tj T*&r /ziopar

        -*?•■*-.




                                                                                                                                        lb



                                             fZ-0


                                                                            £

                  I'V'M '»- '                                   / 'crow
         ji
             ^,r'                         ■ -- ■■--'■-"• ••■-■■• *»• ■                       15'N.^j
                           n*T-                                                    :7
                                                                                            jALllj
                  eru                               3
\J
                                               ~r<5)
                                   6>-Q




                                                                                                                              / *///"
                                                        Sea/*    4- **- A '/■? *
