    Putnam County Bridge #111                       HAER NO. IN-100
    (Dills Ford Bridge)                                               HfltR
    On County Road 50 North                                           I NO
    over Little Walnut Creek
    Greencastle Vicinity
    Putnam County                                                     I-
    Indiana




                                PHOTOGRAPHS
                WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA




                 Historic American Engineering Record
                          National Park Service
                   Great Lakes System Support Office
                           1709 Jackson Street
                         Omaha Nebraska 68102



r
                   HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD
                                                                     I NO
                          Putnam County Bridge #111
                              (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                                                     I-

                                                  HAER NO. IN-100
    Location:      On County Road 50 North
                   over Little Walnut Creek
                   Greencastle Vicinity
                   Putnam County
                   Indiana
                   UTM: 16.504900. 4390780
                   QUAD: Clinton Falls, Indiana
    Date of
    Construction   1909
    Engineer:      Daniel B. Luten, the Indiana Bridge Co.; A. A.
                   Lane (modifications). Contractor: S. H. Gibson
    Present
    Owner:         Putnam County, Indiana
    Present Use:   Vehicular/Pedestrian Bridge, presently closed to
                   vehicular traffic.

    Significance   The bridge is significant as an early Indiana
                   example of a Daniel Luten designed filled
                   spandrel arch concrete bridge. It qualifies for
                   the National Register of Historic Places on the
                   local level.


    Project
    Information:   The bridge was recorded in 1998 by Camille B.
                   Fife and Thomas W. Salmon II of The Westerly
                   Group, Inc., 556 W. 1175 N. Rd., Farmersburg IN
                   47850.




C
                                    Putnam County Bridge #111
                                    (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                    HAER NO. IN-100 {page 2)
Description:   Putnam County Bridge #111, (Dills Ford Bridge),
               is a filled-spandrel, reinforced concrete bridge
               of two spans, with an overall length of 170 feet,
               each span being approximately 81 feet long. The
               arches are typical of Luten-designed bridges,
               being low elliptical, and flat. They are
               intimate with the simple abutments on each bank,
               which are internally unified with the pier and
               arches through steel bar reinforcing.
               Filled-spandrel arches typically have walls which
               rise above the ring at each edge and contain an
               earth-fill over which the roadway is constructed,
               in this case with an asphalt surface. The
               spandrels are simple, with no decorative
               elements. The central pier has a bull-nosed
               foundation and base, above which, on the upstream
               side, is a cast shearwater. The pier is narrow
               and the downstream side protrudes two feet less
               with a narrow pier, and the rounded base only.
               The roadway is single lane, with an asphalt
               surface, laid over the dirt fill between the
               spandrel walls. Originally, the concrete rails
               were pierced by pointed arched openings, forming
               a simple balustrade. The railing has since
               disappeared from the bridge, leaving only
               portions of the solid concrete parapet wall
               remaining at the pier and at each abutment.
               At present, the spandrels are separating from the
               central pier and from the abutments. Repairs
               have been affected on these walls, by piercing
               them and inserting steel wires through,
               perpendicular to the roadbed. These hold in
               place, on the outside of the spandrel walls,
               vertical I-beams, a few feet in length, which are
               presently holding the walls together. The
               deterioration along the entrados of the spandrel
               is such that one can see the portions of the
               steel bar reinforcing which was employed by the
               designer.
               The bridge spans the confluence of two creeks,
               although it is known for its association with
               Little Walnut Creek, the larger of the two
                                    Putnam County Bridge #111
                                    (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                    HAER NO. IN-100 (page 3)
               drainages. The other, Leatherwood Creek, ambles
               toward the bridge from the northwest and is
               considerably smaller than its neighbor to the
               east. Little Walnut Creek continues on in a
               southerly direction in Madison Township, joining
               the Big Walnut before and continuing toward the
               county line.
               The roadway on which the bridge is constructed,
               County Road 50 North, is a secondary rural
               artery, gravel west of the bridge, and asphalt on
               the bridge roadbed and to the east. This
               crossing probably dates to at least the mid-
               nineteenth century, as it is shown on a map of
               1864. That there was a ford present, is
               evidenced by the common name by which it was
               known at the time, Dills Ford. Deteriorated
               portions of a wood structure are present just
               north of the bridge, in the bed of Leatherwood
               Creek. This may represent some remnant of a
               former wood bridge or corduroy road or a more
               contemporary rustic crossing, but no evidence has
               been found of its provenance, and none was
               unearthed during the archaeological investigation
               (conducted by others). If such it is evidence of
               a Ford, the present steep grade at this location
               indicates that there has been a slight change in
               either the road configuration and/or roadbed
               grading.

    History:   Dills Ford Bridge is set in a rural area. Since
               the early part of the nineteenth century the
               countryside surrounding it has been devoted to
               agriculture and rural residences. The road upon
               which it is constructed can be seen to exist as
               early as 1864, but probably dates from much
               before that time. The earliest trail in the
               township ran approximately parallel to and south
               of this road (now called County Road 50 North).
               This early trail was called the Greencastle-
               Brunerstown Road, (or sometimes the Greencastle


f
                                   Putnam County Bridge #111
                                   (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                   HAER NO. IN-100 (page 4)
              and Clinton Road),at least by 1837.1 In an 1879
              map, portions of this artery were shown as
              gravel, probably the first road in Madison
              Township to be so improved. West of the bridge,
              the present road connects to the earlier trail,
              near the village of Brunerstown.
              The artery on which the bridge was constructed
              served as a secondary lane, connecting farms in
              the northern section of the township to this main
              route, either westward to Brunerstown or, due
              south, via another intersecting road. Portions of
              the present road are still gravel. Because of
              its early presence as a rural country crossing,
              it is possible that there may have been a metal
              or wooden span over Dills Ford prior to the
              present 1909 concrete bridge. However, no
              document or physical evidence has been revealed
              to date which would confirm either structure,
              except the remnant in Leatherwood Creek which is
              enigmatic. It is possible, since it was locally
              known as Dills Ford at the time of the bridge's
              construction, that only a ford was present.

              Putnam County had been formed in the early 1820s,
              just after the area had been surveyed. The land
              in Madison Township, located in the west central
              portion of the county, is comprised of rolling
              hills and rich bottom lands. At the time the
              county was formed, most of the land was densely
              forested in valuable timber. The Little Walnut
              Creek is one of many drainages, running in a
              general northeast to southwest direction
              throughout the county. During the nineteenth
              century, (and to some extent, even today) the
              woodlands in the county presented a picturesque
              view to the visitor, as expressed by Professor
              John Collett, in a report of 1880:
                   From an elevation high enough to include the
                   whole county from east to west the autumnal
                   foliage would present ... lines of brilliant
                   colors strongly marked and of magic


     Putnam County Sesquicentennial Committee, A Journey Through
Putnam County History, Greencastle: 1966, p. 260.
                                    Putnam County Bridge #111
                                    (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                    HAER NO. IN-100 (page 5)
                   splendor. ... In the central ... division
                   both the parts merged and mellowed, their
                   contrasting colors uniting to crown every
                   hill and deck every valley with a foliage
                   that has never, can never be painted or
                   described; in which the scarlet, crimson and
                   orange of the sugar and dogwood contrast in
                   quivering life with gold, pink, green and
                   russet of the elm, beech, oak, hickory,
                   polar and minor shrubs." 2
              The immediate locale of the bridge is today
              heavily populated with trees and forbes, a
              reminder of its once picturesque setting.
              Dills Ford, the name by which the crossing was
              known at the turn of the century when the bridge
              was constructed, refers to the owner of the
              adjacent land during that era. The Dills family
              was one of the leading families of Madison
              Township, during this time. William Dills came
              to Indiana from Ohio as a young toddler, the son
              of John and Agnes Dills. The family settled
              first in the eastern part of the township, seven
              miles west of Greencastle, the county seat, on
              the Greencastle-Brunerstown road (also known as
              the state road).
              William Dills father died shortly after their
              arrival in 1845, but the family was kept
              together. Later, his two older brothers left the
              state to seek their fortunes in Iowa and Ohio.
              William is shown on an 1879 map as the owner of
              80 acres on the state road and another 320 acre
              plot in the northern part of the township. His
              mother had died when he was fourteen, but he
              evidently worked hard, saved his funds and
              eventually became a landed farmer of considerable
              success. By 1887, he was credited as the owner




     2/
      ^Quoted in Jesse W. Weik, Weik's History of Putnam Co., IN,
Indianapolis: B. F. Bowed & Co., 1910, p. 32.
                                     Putnam County Bridge #111
                                     (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                     HAER NO. IN-100 (page 6)
                of 155 acres in Madison Township and over 400
                acres in other places.3
                Mr. Dills bought and sold several land parcels in
                Madison Township, including a farm on the Little
                Walnut and another, of 200 acres in section 11,
                which was probably the land adjacent to the
                present bridge. He purchased this land sometime
                between 1879 and 1897, and continued to own it
                during and after the bridge was constructed. At
                the same time, he also owned at least one other
                large farm (of 360 acres), which he successfully
                managed. By the first decade of the twentieth
                century, William Dills was considered "one of
                Putnam's honored and substantial citizens."4
                A brief note on the reverse side of a
                contemporary blueprint of the bridge mentions
                "No. 10 School Bridge", as well as "Dills Ford".
                This undoubtedly referred to a new, two-story
                building "on Little Walnut" Creek constructed c.
                1897-98. For a time it served as a high school.
                William Dills had deeded some of his land in the
                southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
                section 11 for school purposes in 1897.5 Thus it
                is likely that this school was present near the
                bridge when it was constructed and that the
                crossing served students who walked or traveled
                via horse-drawn wagon from farms to the west of
                the school.

                In the late summer of 1909, the Putnam County
                Commissioners published notices in the local
                newspaper about the upcoming lettings of local
                bridge contracts. Plans for the bridge over
                Little Walnut Creek(Dills Ford), as well as two
                others, steel bridges, over Doe and Mill Creeks,

    3
      Lewis Publishing Co., Biographical and Historical Record of
Putnam Co., IN, Lewis Publishing Co:1887, p.279 (facsimile.)
    4
        Weik, History, p. 560.
    5
        Putnam County Sesquicentennial Committee, A Journey, p. 266
                                       Putnam County Bridge #111
                                       (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                       HAER NO. IN-100 (page 7)
                 were duly made available to area contractors. No
                 doubt, the single remaining blueprint, now stored
                 in the county surveyor's office is a remnant of
                 the package prepared for this letting (see Index
                 to Photographs).

                 About a dozen contractors responded to the
                 offering. Some bid only on the two steel
                 bridges, some further divided the sub-structure
                 and superstructures, others chose to bid on all
                 three. The contractors came from near and far;
                 the Attica and Vincennes Bridge Companies both
                 participated, as well as local builders like S.
                 H. Gibson of Putnam County. The latter presented
                 the "best bid" according to the County
                 Commissioners record (although not the lowest)
                 and was duly awarded the contract for the
                 project. 6

                 The plans for the bridge had been developed
                 earlier, according to the Commissioners record as
                 appropriations had been made in September of the
                 previous year. The plans for the bridge were
                 presented to the commissioners on August 2, 1909,
                 by the county surveyor, A. A. Lane whom the
                 record indicates "prepared" the documents (from
                 plans provided by the Indiana Bridge Company, as
                 was typically the case),7 Alec A. Lane had been
                 Putnam County Surveyor since 1903. He was an
                 1894 graduate of DePauw, and by 1910 could boast
                 of a general practice of land surveying in which
                 he covered the state, as well as numerous county
                 bridge and highway designs. According to a
                 contemporary history he was also in great demand
                 all over the state to settle land disputes.8



         6
         Putnam County Commissioners Court, Special August Term,
1909, Greencastle, Indiana, August 25, 1909. (County Commissioners
Record, Vol. 20, pp. 411-412.
     7
         County Commissioners Record, Vol. 20, p. 409.
     8
         Weik, History, pp. 624-625.
                                     Putnam County Bridge #111
                                     (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                     HAER NO. IN-100 (page 8)
                Putnam County Bridge No. Ill was designed by
                Daniel Luten, through his design firm, the
                Indiana Bridge Company.9 Daniel B. Luten was a
                professional engineer with an entrepreneurial
                bent who pioneered simplicity and economy in the
                design of reinforced concrete bridges in Indiana
                and throughout the United States. At one time he
                may have been responsible for as many as twelve
                thousand structures.
                A native of Michigan, Luten became identified
                with the Hoosier state a year after his
                graduation from the University of Michigan, when
                he relocated to become an Instructor of
                Architectural and Sanitary Engineering at Purdue
                University. Luten espoused bridges where
                concrete and reinforcing steel worked in harmony
                and where simplicity of design allowed ready
                interpretation by the "practical men" who would
                build them. 10
                The arch which Luten favored for his filled-
                spandrel arches(the Dills Ford Bridge is a good
                example) was a semi-elliptical one, which was
                touted, in a 1902 issue of Engineering News
                Record, as "the flattest concrete-steel arch in
                the world". Luten had left the academic world at
                the turn of the century to pursue his ideas as a
                practical engineer in the private sector. With
                several patents in hand, he formed several
                companies in Indiana and California before his
                National Bridge Company became nationally
                successful in the area of Bridge design. A man
                who believed in experience, he even contracted
                for the construction of bridges during his early
                years. The bridge in Putnam County was built
                during the peak of his success. In 1915, he held
                39 U.S. patents for concrete bridges, published
                over 65 articles and been responsible for the

     9
       James Cooper, Artistry and Ingenuity in artificial Stone:
Indiana's Concrete Bridges, 1900-1942., Greencastle, IN: Cooper,
1997, p.248.
    10
         Ibid., pp. 37-38,44-45.
                                  Putnam County Bridge #111
                                  (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                  HAER NO. IN-100 (page 9)
            design of about 6,000 bridges in the U.S., Mexico
            and Canada.11
            The bridge which Daniel Luten designed for the
            crossing over Little Walnut Creek in Madison
            Township once embodied his principles of
            simplicity, efficiency and sleekness of design.
            In this, it represented its designer's conviction
            that reinforced concrete bridges should not
            attempt to recall their stone counterparts, nor
            should ornamentation be a major concern. In
            this, he was in opposition to the "City
            Beautiful" architects like George Kessler who
            employed the use of stone, and other decorative
            work to enhance a classic revival motif in their
            structures. In its original condition, with its
            simple balustrade, narrow, graceful piers and
            lean arches, it served as a chaste accompaniment
            to its picturesque surroundings. Today, much of
            this quality has been lost, with the demolition
            of the balustrade, the deterioration of its piers
            and the ever-widening cracks along its spandrel
            walls.




ii
     Ibid., pp. 45,50-51,62-65.
                                   Putnam County Bridge #111
                                   (Dills Ford Bridge)
                                   HAER NO. IN-100 (page 10)
Bibliography:

Adams, G. H. & Co.,Pub. New Topographical Atlas and Gazeteer of
Indiana. Indianapolis, Indiana: G. H. Adams. & Co., 1871.

Baker, Ira 0., C.E. A Treatise on Masonry Construction. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1903.
Beers, J. H. & Co., Pub. Atlas of Putnam County, Indiana.
Chicago, J. H. Beers & Co., 1879.
Bloomfield, Tom; Holmes, Maurice; Dale, Lisa; Dorrell, Ruth,
Ed's. Putnam County Index of Persons and Firms. Indianapolis,
Indiana: County History Indexing Project, Family History
Section, Indiana Historical Society, 1980.
Cooper, James L. Artistry and Ingenuity in Artificial Stone,
Indiana's Concrete Bridges, 1900-1942. Greencastle, Indiana:
James L. Cooper, 1997.

Cowles and Titus. Map of Putnam County, Indiana. Philadelphia,
PA: Cowles & Titus, 1864, Xerox in DePauw University Library,
Special Collections.
Lewis Pub. Co. Biographical and Historical Record of Putnam
County, Indiana. Lewis Publishing Company, 1887, Computer
facsimile, 1995 in the Putnam County Library.
Putnam County Sesquicentennial Committee. A Journey Through
Putnam County History. Greencastle, Indiana: 1966, Collection
of the Putnam County Library.
Tyrrell, Henry Grattan, C.E. Artistic Bridge Design. Chicago:
Myron C. Clark Pub. Co., 1912.

Weik, Jesse W. History of Putnam County. Indianapolis, Indiana:
B. F. Bowen, 1910, Reprint, Evansville, Indiana, Unigraphic,
Inc., 1976.
Other Sources: Records & Blueprint in the collection of the
Putnam County Surveyor's office.
County Commissioners Records, Putnam County Courthouse,
Greencastle, Indiana.
                      Putnam County Bridge #111
                      (Dills Ford Bridge)
                      HAER NO. IN-100 (page 11)




    LOCATION MAP
       BRIDGE




                           |   WARREN
    WASHINGTON
                   NORTH




c
