     Wells County Bridge No. 74                                HAER NO. IN-94
     On County Road 400 West over Rock Creek Ditch
     Approximately 6.5 miles west of Bluffton                                {NO
     Wells County
     Indiana                                                                <?J- BLUFF, v,




                                  PHOTOGRAPHS

                  WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA


r^




                        Historic American Engineering Record
                                 National Park Service
                         Great Lakes System Support Office
                                  1709 Jackson Street
                               Omaha Nebraska 68102


C
                     HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD

                              Wells County Bridge No. 74                         IND
                                                                                 90~8LUFF.Vi
                                                                                           J
                                                                                  /-
                                                               HAER NO. IN-94

    Location:               On County Road 400 West over Rock Creek
                            Approximately 6.5 miles west of Bluffton
                            Wells County
                            Indiana
                            UTM: 16.643700.4510220
                            QUAD: Liberty Center, Indiana

    Date of Construction:    1903

    Engineer:               Indiana Bridge Company

    Present Owner:          Wells County, Indiana

    Present Use:            Vehicular Bridge.

    Significance:           This single span Pratt pony truss bridge is eligible for
                            inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places
                            based on its engineering significance at the local level.
                            The structure is a good example of early 20th metal
                            bridge construction. It was built by the Indiana Bridge
                            Company and highly rated in a survey of Indiana's
                            metal bridges.


    Project Information:    The bridge is scheduled for replacement, having been
                            inspected and found, generally to be in serious
                            condition. In addition, the bridge is occasionally
                            flooded and does not meet current safety standards. A
                            Memorandum of Agreement was accepted in 1996 by
                            the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, allowing
                            its removal. The bridge will be offered for 60 days for
                            relocation and reassembly. It was recorded in 1997 by
                            Camille B. Fife and Thomas W. Salmon II of The
                            Westerly Group, Inc., 556 W. 1175 N. Rd., Farmersburg
                            IN 47850.



O


I
                                            Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                            HAER NO. IN-94 (page 2)

Description:

     Wells County Bridge No. 74 is located in a rural area of the county,
     approximately one mile south of State Road 124 in Liberty Township. It
     spans Rock Creek, which is a well-maintained drainage with steep-sided
     grassy banks. The bridge is located on 400 West Road, a north-south
     county artery. It is adjacent to and immediately south of a farmstead,
     containing a house and several outbuildings, including a gable-roofed
     bam which is situated on a slight bluff above the creek.

     The bridge is 72 feet long with an approximate deck width of 14 feet.
     The single-span structure contains three chords plus the inclined end
     posts (a total of five panels.) The four vertical posts are fabricated of two
     right angle bars joined to form a "T" with flat bar inserted between and
     used to lace them together. The diagonals within the chords are
     comprised of pairs of drawn bars. In the center chord, these bars are
     crossed.

     The rectangular beam is a riveted "I" section. The flange is field riveted at
     the top of the columns. The bridge is pinned throughout with bridge
     bolts, washers and nuts. The steel beams were evidently produced by
     the Carnegie mill, as the northeast angle contains the maker's mark in
     raised letters. The bridge decking is carried by "I" sections and five
     stringers resting atop these sections. The stirrups are formed by applying
     two quarter inch plates to the flanges of the vertical column angles and
     by inserting two eyelidded drawn steel bars between the plates and a
     staple. All are pinned together with a bridge bolt, washer and nuts.

     The steel portal members are brought down to a cast iron shoe, which is
     bolted to the stone abutment. The inclined end posts are pinned to
     horizontal bars, the upper chords, which connect the vertical posts.
     There are latticed guard rails at approximately three feet above the road
     bed on the inner faces of both sides of the bridge

     The bridge deck is constructed of wood, the first decking, above the
     stringers is laid perpendicular to the road bed, the second course is
     parallel to the road bed and overlaid with asphalted gravel. In some
     places, the road has been worn down to the lower level and the shadows
     of the perpendicular timbers can been seen from above.

     Wells County Bridge No. 74 rests upon two stone abutments, of rough-
     dressed, coursed, native limestone. Approximately eight courses are
     visible above ground level. The stone was set with moderately wide
     mortar joints, many of which have begun to fail. Some evidence of repair
                                                   Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                                   HAER NO. IN-94 (page 3)
            is also visible. The abutments project away from the bridge on the
            northeast and southwest comers, where slight wingwalls support the
            structure. Grass has grown atop the abutments on both north and south
            portals. Below the abutment, as rip-rap to control the wanderings of the
            stream, are chunks of concrete, possibly remnants of a former decking.


     History:

            Wells County, in the northeastern section of Indiana, was formed in 1837.
            The county was, as it is now, an agricultural community. The town of
            Bluffton is its county seat, located due east of Bridge No. 74. The bridge
            is located on a secondary road which follows the section lines
            established by the Federal survey and continued after the establishment
            of the county. According to local sources, the first road in Liberty
            Township (within which the bridge is located) was surveyed in 1839. *
            Undoubtedly, development of a complete system of roads was slow, but
            after a plank road to Fort Wayne (to the north) was constructed, gravel
            roads and bridges were built throughout the county. The present County
            Road 400 West, on which the bridge is located is shown on nineteenth
            century maps, but it was not as important an artery as the north-south
            road immediately to the east. This road, (known as the Liberty Center
            Gravel Road and later, old State Road No. 303) led south from a major
            gravel road (present day S. R. 124 which connects to Bluffton) to the
            community of Liberty Center. Nineteenth century maps indicate that
            these roads were improved gravel arteries, however, C. R. 400 West is
            not so designated, it is probable that it was not improved until late in
            the century.2

            No information was discovered regarding the possible predecessor to
            Bridge No. 74, at the time of this investigation. Rock Creek was a
            prominent county drainage, however, even during the nineteenth century.
            The waterway has obviously been improved over the years, but it is
            likely that the steep banks were present, to some degree in early years,
            making a ford somewhat impractical. Therefore it would have been
            logical to construct a wooden bridge to span the creek, affording access
            to families living on the rich farmland which surrounded it.



        1
           Dell Ford, "A Brief History of Wells County", unpublished MSS, County Courthouse,
    Bluffton, Wells County.
C           Ibid.
                                                  Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                                  HAER NO. IN-94 (page 4)
        By the turn of the century, Wells County was served by at least two
        railroads, which ran through Bluffton, the nearby county seat. 3 Later, in
        the early twentieth century traction lines also traversed the county.
        Bridge No. 74, provided an important improvement in county
        transportation during the early part of the new century, especially for
        farmers who sought reliable roads and crossings, to transport their goods
        to Bluffton for shipment by rail to other major centers in the state and
        region.

        Bids were solicited for the construction of the bridge over Rock Creek on
        June 10, 1903, through an advertisement placed in the Bluffton Chronicle.
        The bridge to be constructed was described as a 70 foot span iron bridge
        over Rock Creek in Liberty township near the George Frantz farm.4

        On June 24th, the County Commissioners, David Ochsenrider, Joseph
        Stahl and George W. Lechner, met in special session to consider the
        proposals which had been submitted. The lowest bid was provided by
        the Indiana Bridge Company, of Muncie, Indiana. They had given two
        options: the first, for $3,400 would have used imported stone for the
        abutments; the second, utilizing native stone, was for only $2,245 and
        was selected. The contract was just $5 lower than the appropriation,
        according to a local newspaper account. The Indiana Bridge Company
        was awarded the contract over six other bidders for the project, at least
        one of which was a local firm known as Miller & Clark. 5


        The Indiana Bridge Company had established an enviable reputation in
        its home state by 1903. Founded in 1886 by six enterprising men in
        Muncie, Indiana who purchased the Indianapolis Bridge Company for
        $10,500, reorganized it and moved the equipment from the capital city to
        a new plant at Muncie in northeastern Indiana. The new company also
        acquired the patent rights to the Godman "leg bridge", so-called because
        of its distinctive leg-like supports. 6


    3 Ibid.

    4
        "Notice of Bridge Letting, Bluffton Chronicle, June 10, 1903.
    5
      "Bridges and Roads, Commissioners Let Contracts on One Bridge and Two Gravel
Roads." Bluffton Evening News, June 24, 1903.
    6
      Indiana Bridge, A Hoosier Tradition, Founded 1886, Muncie, Indiana: Indiana Bridge
Co., 1952.
                                             Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                             HAER NO. IN-94 (page 5)


     In August of 1887, the stockholders of the company hired two men who
     would eventually guide the company well into the mid-twentieth century.
     Charles M. Kimbrough, a local retailer, became the general manager and
     John R. Marsh, recently graduated from Columbia University was named
     as engineer. By 1902, Marsh and Kimbrough had purchased stock from
     the former owners and assumed controlling interest in the company. 7

     Indiana Bridge Company supplied bridges to many counties in Indiana
     from its founding, throughout the 1890s. Before 1900 it also sold bridges
     as far south as Louisiana and Mississippi and west to Texas and Iowa,
     although most of its sales were in the neighboring states of Ohio,
     Michigan, Illinois and Kentucky. The company could provide a range of
     services to meet client needs, from technical advice and engineering
     design to fabrication and erection of the structure. At the turn of the
     century the Indiana Bridge Company employed at least five engineers and
     seven to ten erection crews. Company salesmen and/or county agents
     were active in many Indiana towns, including Bluffton, Indiana, only a
     few miles from Bridge No. 74's location. The firm also subcontracted to
     local contractors who built the substructure, and in some cases, sold
     metal structures to other bridge companies. 8

     A number of Pratt structures built by the Indiana Bridge Company have
     survived nearly a century or more. A few have detailing similar to Bridge
     No. 74. These structures, according to a Hoosier bridge scholar, have
     been said to project an image of simplicity, with proper proportions.9
     Although many Pratt pony bridges have been identified in the state, less
     than two dozen have been associated with the Indiana Bridge Company,
     or its predecessor, the Indianapolis Bridge Company, according to a
     survey conducted in 1987. 10

     The Indiana Bridge Company survived steel strikes and a nationwide
     financial panic in the 1890s, as well as a local smallpox epidemic. By
     1894 they could boast of a monthly payroll for 160 men. That same year,
     they began to diversify by producing structural members for agricultural,


7
     Cooper, James L, Iron Monuments to Distant Posterity, p. 18
8
     Ibid., pp. 19-20.
9
     Ibid., p. 59.
10
     Ibid.
                                           Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                           HAER NO. IN-94 (page 6)
     industrial and other buildings. By 1904, the company was so successful
     that it was able to erect a new plant on the outskirts of Muncie,
     Indiana.11 As the new century progressed, Indiana Bridge Company's
     profits were increasingly earned through structural work for industrial,
     commercial and civic buildings. The company continues to prosper.

     The Wells County Bridge has survived for over ninety years because it
     was well constructed by a company that prided itself on the quality of its
     bridges and other metal structures. It was supported by sturdy, coursed
     stone abutments, of simple but efficient design. A specification for stone
     work, found in the Wells County Commissioners minutes of March, 1903,
     gives some idea of the requirements which were expected of such
     abutments. The stone was to be of the best which could be taken from
     quarries at Bluffton or Markle (a town north of Bluffton, in nearby
     Huntington County.) The mortar was to be made of one part "good fresh
     Gasson, German or Buckeye Portland cement to two parts sharp clean
     sand to be proportioned by measure." The courses were to be of regular
     thickness with not less than one header for every three stretchers. All
     stone work was to be started on solid foundations, but at no less a depth
     than two feet below the bottom of the ditch or stream over which the
     bridge crossed. The final pointing of the stone work was to be done
     with a mortar of one part Portland cement to one part sand. 12




11 Indiana Bridge.

12
     Wells County Commissioners Record, March 3, 1903, p. 157.
                                           Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                           HAER NO. IN-94 (page 7)
Bibliography:

Comp, T. Allan, and Jackson, Donald. Bridge Truss Types: A guide to dating
and identifying AASLH Technical Leaflet 95, Nashville, Tennessee: American
Association for State and Local History, 1977.

Cooper, James L. Iron Monuments to Distant Posterity, Indiana's Metal
Bridges, 1870 - 1930. Indianapolis, Indiana: Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, 1987.

Indiana Bridge: A Hoosier Tradition, Founded 1886. Muncie, Indiana: Indiana
Bridge Company, May, 1952.

Tyrrell, Henry Grattan, C.E. Artistic Bridge Design. Chicago: Myron C. Clark
Pub. Co., 1912.



Newspapers in the collection of the Wells County Public Library, including the
Bluffton Evening News and the Bluffton Chronicle. County Commissioners
records in the County Courthouse, Bluffton, Indiana.
                                          Wells County Bridge No. 74
                                          HAER NO. IN-94 (page 8)
AREA MAP     Wells County Bridge No. 74




              SCALE-UIUS

   =   TSF   *.t*   "   >M"   •M   «JM
                                                              AREA MAP
